e typically part of the approach slab plan sheets ҽ On a multi-span bridge, expansion joint details are typically on a stand-alone sheet group that comes after the superstructure deck sheets. ҽ Expansion joint sheets can be copied from the Bridge Office Library but they must be modified to match the project requirements.
• Traffic Barrier ҽ Traffic barrier sheets can be copied from the Bridge Office library but they must be modified to match the project requirements.
• Railing/Fence ҽ Railing or Fence sheets can be copied from the Bridge Office library but they must be modified to match the project requirements.
• Bridge Approach Slab ҽ Approach slab sheets can be copied from the Bridge Office library and modified as necessary for the project.
• Signs/Sign Structures ҽ Sign and Sign Structure sheets can be copied from the Bridge Office library but they must be modified to match the project requirements. ҽ These only pertain to signage that will be attached to the bridge or supporting bridge structure
• Architectural Treatment ҽ The State Bridge and Structures Architect is responsible for designing and approving much of the architectural treatment to be used. Detailers will work with the State Bridge and Structures Architect to incorporate the treatment and associated details into the plan set. ҽ If a standard drawing exists in the Bridge Office library, it is permissible to copy these and modify them as necessary. ҽ If there are no standard drawings in the Bridge Office library, the State Bridge and Structures Architect may approve the use of a similar set of details from an existing plan set, as long as the details used are modified to meet the requirements of the current plan set. ҽ If no standards or examples exist, the State Bridge and Structures Architect is responsible for the design and requirements of the Architectural Treatment. ҽ Basic treatments that are commonly used (i.e. Fractured Fin finish) may be incorporated into the detail or plan sheets it pertains to, such as traffic barrier or wingwall sheets, and have standard details that already exist for use without the need of the Bridge Office Architect to design or approve the use of. ҽ Some, more complex, instances require Architectural treatment to be its own set of plan sheets.
• Barlist ҽ The barlist sheets do not require stamping because they are not officially part of the contract plan set.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 11-21
Chapter 11
Detailing Practice
11.1.3.D
Wall Structure Sheets and Detailing Practices
Wall sheets within the contract plan set shall be determined and placed by the WSDOT region office responsible for the corridor project regardless of the design group responsible for drafting the wall plans. Any bridge plan sheet that includes wall geometry should do so only for reference and should only include minimal wall information as necessary to reduce redundant information. Walls that directly support bridge loads or act as a bridge abutment, such as a geosynthetic retaining wall supporting a bridge footing, shall be laid out and detailed entirely in the bridge plan set as these will be treated as bridge structural components. Unless the wall to be detailed meets specific criteria as mentioned previously, the wall sheets will stand alone in their own section of the plan set as determined by the WSDOT region office. Therefore, although it is important to show and reference the walls on the bridge layout sheet, the walls shall have their own separate layout sheet(s) as required. The following specifies general minimum requirements for each wall sheet detailed by the bridge design group. 11.1.3.D.1
Layout
• It is permissible for all of the walls within the plan set to be placed on a single wall layout sheet if the size and scaling permits, and only when deemed appropriate by the design engineer as a means to best convey overall design intent, otherwise each wall will have its own individual layout.
• If using a single layout sheet, the wall sheets should be organized by placing all walls in the same location within the Contract Plans.
• Each layout view shall include stationing and offset along the alignment for both the wall alignment and the main project construction alignment.
• Each layout view shall include all utilities that will be in place (existing) at the time of wall construction and are located within the vicinity of the wall. 11.1.3.D.2
Developed Elevation
• Each wall shall have a developed elevation view. This view may be placed on the layout sheet if size and scaling permits, otherwise will be placed on its own sheet.
• Each elevation view shall be detailed using the same vertical and horizontal scale. Exaggerated horizontal or vertical scales are not permitted.
• Each elevation view shall have an overall dimension of the wall along the wall alignment line.
• Each elevation view shall include additional horizontal dimension lines denoting the size and total number of each wall section panels if applicable and the locations of expansion joints and or contraction joints.
• The elevation view shall show the existing and proposed ground line at the top and bottom of the wall.
• Each elevation view shall show, at a minimum, the top elevation and bottom elevation at the beginning of the wall and the end of the wall, as well as the elevation at any profile transition.
Page 11-22
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Detailing Practice
Chapter 11
• Each elevation view shall show all existing utilities that will intersect the face of the wall or wall alignment. New utilities intersecting the face of the wall or wall alignment that will need to be accommodated by the construction of the wall shall be shown as well.
• A reference elevation may be shown in a wall elevation view if deemed necessary by the design engineer to help clarify the design intent and improve plan readability. If shown, the elevation line shall be placed below the ground line as determined by the design engineer. The reference elevation should be determined based on 20-foot increments from 0 and should be set at the previous 20-foot incremented elevation prior to the lowest elevation of the ground line. For example, a low ground elevation of 163.35’ would call for a minimum reference elevation of 160.00’ but for plan clarity and readability could be set at any previous 20-foot incremented elevation such as 140.00.’ or 100.00’ but is recommended to keep it as close as possible to the low ground elevation to maintain visual association with the view.
• For wall height dimensioning standards refer to BDM Section 8.1.11.E. 11.1.3.D.3
Details
• All relevant details necessary to construct all aspects of the wall shall be included in the plan set. Standard Plan retaining wall details shall not be included unless modifications to such details have been made.
• For additional detailing requirements refer to BDM Section 8.1.11.E.
• If a design requires specific and unique architectural finishes, a detail sheet or sheets shall be included in the wall plan set as required.
11.1.4
Electronic Plan Sharing Policy The following procedure describes the Bridge Design Office or WSDOT consultants’ electronic plan sharing policy with other WSDOT offices, consultants, contractors and other agencies: Plan sheets prepared by the Bridge Design Office or WSDOT consultants may be electronically sent out to other WSDOT offices, consultants, contractors and other agencies in DWG format only if all of the following steps are taken: 1.
Entire information in the title block is removed from the plan sheet.
2.
A disclaimer reading “FOR INFORMATION ONLY” is printed diagonally across each plan sheet; and
3.
A letter of disclaimer is sent as a cover or an attachment to the plan sheet(s), indicating that attached plans are for information only and that WSDOT has no responsibility for accuracy of the contents.
Bridge Office plan sheets may also be electronically shared if requested in PDF format. PDF files need to only include the disclaimer noted in Step 2 above. Examples of bridge plan sheets modified for electronic sharing are shown for clarity. Time spent modifying and submitting electronic plan sheets shall be charged to the job number provided by the construction PE’s office. This policy applies only to current projects under design or under contract. Historical or as-built plan sheets may only be shared in PDF format, and only if condition #3 is followed, as described above.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 11-23
Chapter 11
11.1.5
Detailing Practice
Structural Steel 11.1.5.A
General
• Flat pieces of steel are termed plates, bars, sheets or strips, depending on the dimensions. 11.1.5.B
Bars
• Up to 6 inches wide, 0.203 in. (3/16 inch) and over in thickness, or 6 inches to 8 inches wide, 0.230 in. (7/32 inch) and over in thickness. 11.1.5.C
Plates
• Over 8 inches wide, 0.230 in. (7/32 inch) and over in thickness, or over 48 inches wide, 0.180 in (11/64 inch) and over in thickness. 11.1.5.D
Strips
• Thinner pieces up to 12 inches wide are strips and over 12 inches are sheets. A complete table of classification may be found in the AISC Manual of Steel Construction, 8th Ed. Page 6-3. 11.1.5.E
Labeling
• The following table shows the usual method of labeling some of the most frequently used structural steel shapes. Note that the inches symbol (“) is omitted, but the foot symbol (‘) is used for length including lengths less than a foot. Steel Callout Symbology
Page 11-24

Page 11-25
Chapter 11
11.1.7
Detailing Practice
Abbreviations 11.1.7.A
General
• Abbreviations, as a rule, are to be avoided.
• Because different words sometimes have identical abbreviations, the word should be spelled out where the meaning may be in doubt.
• A few standard signs are in common use in the Bridge and Structures Office. These are listed with the abbreviations.
• A period should be placed after all abbreviations, except as listed below.
• Apostrophes are usually not used. Exceptions: pav’t., req’d.
• Abbreviations for plurals are usually the same as the singular. Exceptions: figs., no., ctrs., pp.
• No abbreviations in titles. 11.1.7.B
List of abbreviations commonly used on bridge plan sheets: A abutment adjust, adjacent aggregate alternate ahead aluminum American Society for Testing and Materials American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and		 angle point approved approximate area asbestos cement pipe asphalt concrete asphalt treated base at
ABUT. ADJ. AGG. ALT. AHD. AL. ASTM
avenue average

WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 11-29
Chapter 11
Detailing Practice
M maintenance malleable manhole manufacturer maximum mean high water mean higher high water mean low water mean lower low water meters mile(s) miles per hour millimeters minimum minute(s) miscellaneous modified monument
MAINT. MALL. MH MFR. MAX. MHW MHHW MLW MLLW M. MI. MPH MM. MIN. MIN. or ‘ MISC. MOD. MON.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum 1929 near face near side North North American Vertical Datum 1988 Northbound not to scale number; numbers
NGVD 29 N.F. N.S. N. NAVD 88 NB NTS #, NO., NOS.
or		 original ground ounce(s) outside diameter outside face out to out overcrossing overhead
/ O.G. OZ. O.D. O.F. O to O O-XING OH
page; pages pavement pedestrian per cent pivot point Plans, Specifications and Estimates
P.; PP. PAV’T PED. % PP PS&E
N
O
P
Page 11-30
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Detailing Practice
Chapter 11
plate point point of compound curve point of curvature point of intersection point of reverse curve point of tangency point on vertical curve point on horizontal curve point on tangent polyvinyl chloride portland cement concrete pound, pounds pounds per square foot pounds per square inch power pole precast pressure prestressed prestressed concrete pipe Puget Sound Power and Light
° or PL PT. PCC P.C. P.I. PRC P.T. PVC POC POT PVC PCC LB., LBS., # PSF, LBS./FT.², LBS./ ‘,or #/’ PSI, LBS./IN.², LBS./ “,or #/” PP P.C. PRES. P.S. P.C.P. P.S.P.&L.
quantity quart
QUANT. QT.
radius railroad railway Range regulator reinforced, reinforcing reinforced concrete reinforced concrete box reinforced concrete pipe required retaining wall revised (date) right right of way road roadway route
R. RR RWY. R. REG. REINF. RC RCB RCP REQ’D RET. WALL REV. RT. R/W RD. RDWY. RTE.
Q
R
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 11-31
Chapter 11
Detailing Practice
S seconds Section (map location) Section (of drawing) sheet shoulder sidewalk South southbound space(s) splice specification square foot (feet) square inch square yard station standard state route stiffener stirrup structure, structural support surface, surfacing symmetrical
SEC. or “ SEC. SECT. SHT. SHLD. or SH. SW. or SDWK S. SB SPA. SPL. SPEC. SQ. FT. or FT.² SQ. IN. or IN.² SY, SQ. YD. or YD.² STA. STD. SR STIFF. STIRR. STR. SUPP. SURF. SYMM.
tangent telephone temporary test hole thick(ness) thousand thousand (feet) board measure ton(s) total township transition transportation transverse treatment typical

Chapter 12 Quantities, Costs, and Specifications 

WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-iii
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 12-iv
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Chapter 12 12.1
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Quantities - General The quantities of the various materials and work items involved in the construction of a project that includes bridges and structures are needed for establishing the estimated cost of the project throughout the design process, and for establishing a basis for comparison of the contractor’s bids.
12.1.1
Cost Estimating Quantities Quantities for establishing cost estimates are often necessary during various stages of project development and are required at the completion of the Bridge PS&E. These quantities should be calculated from the best information available at the time, see Section 12.2.3. The policy regarding the preparation of quantity calculations is as follows: 12.1.1.A
Conceptual Stage
During the conceptual stage of a project, estimated quantities may be required to arrive at an estimated cost. The need for conceptual stage quantities will be determined by the Bridge Project Support Unit. 12.1.1.B
Preliminary Plan Stage
Upon completion of the preliminary plan, estimated quantities may be required to arrive at an estimated cost. The need for preliminary plan stage quantities will be determined by the Bridge Project Support Unit. 12.1.1.C
Design Stage
If requested, quantity calculations shall be made, reviewed, and submitted to the Bridge Project Support Unit by the Bridge Design Unit as the design progresses. The first submittal of estimated quantities shall be made as soon as the major dimensions of the structure are determined. As refinements in the design are made, quantities varying more than 10 percent from those previously submitted shall be resubmitted. 12.1.1.D
Final Contract Quantities
Upon completion of structural design and plans, the quantities of materials and work items involved in the construction of the project shall be computed,. See Sections 12.2.2 and 12.2.4.B.
12.1.2
Not Included in Bridge Quantities List Items of work which appear in the bridge plan sheets, but for which details, specifications, and quantities are not included in the Bridge PS&E, shall be listed in the “Not Included in Bridge Quantities List” (WSDOT Form 230-038 and Appendix 12.1-A1). This list is required for every bridge, even if no items of work are shown in the Plans that are in this category. (In this case, fill out the bridge information at the top of the form and write “NONE” across the form.) This form is transmitted to the Region Design PE Office with all Preliminary Plan submittals, all Bridge PS&E distributions, and at various milestone points during the design process, to ensure that the responsibility for all PS&E items is clear. Particular care shall be taken in the preparation of this list as omissions can result in an incomplete project PS&E with missing information for work items, or conflicting overlapping information for work items.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-1
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.2
Computation of Quantities
12.2.1
Responsibilities 12.2.1.A
Design Unit
The Design Unit is responsible for calculating quantities required for cost estimates for Preliminary Plans prepared in Design Units, calculating preliminary quantities at various milestones during the design process, and calculating quantities for the final Bridge PS&E. The Design Unit is responsible for notifying the Region Design PE Office and the Bridge Project Support Unit whenever structural design changes and alterations are made to the design features and quantities which affect the cost of the structure, especially following the distribution of the initial Preliminary Plan. 12.2.1.B
Bridge Project Support Unit
The Bridge Project Support Unit is responsible for computing quantities for conceptual stage cost estimates, and cost estimates for Preliminary Plans prepared in the Bridge Project Support Unit. The Bridge Project Support Unit is responsible for ensuring that the quantities listed in the AD Copy Bid Proposal correspond to those received from the Design Unit.
12.2.2
Procedure for Computation Quantities are to be computed and checked independently. The designer/originator and checker shall separately summarize their calculated quantities on the Bridge Quantities Form 230-031 (See Appendix 12.2-A1) in the units shown thereon. The two summaries shall be submitted to the Design Unit Manager for comparison. The designer/originator and checker shall use identical breakdowns for each quantity. For example, the designer/ originator’s quantities for excavation for each of Piers 1, 2, and 3 should be compared separately against the corresponding quantities made by the checker. When the desired accuracy, see Section 12.2.4, is achieved, a Manager’s Bridge Quantities form shall be prepared and submitted to the Bridge Project Support Unit along with the Pre-Contract Review Bridge Plans review set. (This form is the same as previously mentioned except that it is labeled “Manager’s Bridge Quantities” and is completed by the Design Unit Manager or designee. If the Design Unit Manager elects, the designer/originator’s or the checker’s Bridge Quantities form may be designated as “Supervisor’s Bridge Quantities.”) This form is used by the Bridge Project Support Unit to prepare the final bridge cost estimate. All quantity calculations and bridge quantities forms are to be filed in the job file for the structure or the PS&E file for the project. All subsequent revisions shall be handled in the same manner as the original quantities. On the “Bridge Quantities” form, any revision to the original figure should not be erased but crossed out and replaced by the new figure using a different colored pencil. If there are too many revisions, the old summary sheet should be marked void, left in the file, and a new sheet made out, marked “Revised,” dated, and the original forwarded to the Bridge Project Support Unit. Mistakes in quantities can be very costly to Contracting Agency. The designer/originator and checker must account for all items of work on the “Bridge Quantities” form, and must also be careful to enter an item of work only once (e.g., concrete or steel rebar in the superstructure should not be entered both in the lump sum superstructure breakdown and in the unit bid item quantity).
Page 12-2
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.2.3
Chapter 12
Data Source Quantities of materials for use in preliminary cost estimates can often be obtained from the quantities calculated for previous similar designs. This information is available from the Bridge Project Support Unit.
12.2.4
Accuracy 12.2.4.A
Preliminary Quantities
Quantities used for cost estimates prepared during the conceptual stage of the design are expected to have an accuracy of ± 10 percent. The first iteration of quantities, after the preliminary plan has been completed, is expected to have an accuracy of ± 5 percent. 12.2.4.B
Final Quantities
Final quantities in the Bridge PS&E submittal, including bar list quantities, to be listed in the Special Provisions and Bid Proposal sheet of the AD Copy, are to be calculated to have an accuracy of ± 1 percent.
12.2.5
Excavation 12.2.5.A
Structure Excavation, Class A BRIDGE DESIGN MANUAL
Excavation necessary for the construction of bridge piers and reinforced concrete Criteria retaining wallsQuantities is classified as Structure Excavation, Class A (see the definition Computation of Quantities as specified in Standard Specifications Section 2-09.3(2)). Payment for such excavation is generally by B. Final Quantities volume measurement.Final The quantity of excavation to be paid for is measured as specified quantities to be listed in the Special Provisions and Bid Proposal sheet are to be calculated to have an accuracy of ±12-09.4, percent, including list. in Standard Specifications Section andbarcomputation of this quantity shall conform 11.2.5 Excavation to these specifications. If the construction circumstances for the project require structure A. Structure Excavation, Class A excavation limits that do not conform to the Standard Specifications definition, then the Excavation necessary for the construction of bridge piers and reinforced concrete retaining walls is modified structure excavation limits shallClass beA.shown the atPlans. classified as Structure Excavation, Payment for in suchdetails excavation isin generally the unit contract price per cubic yard. The quantity of excavation to be paid for is measured as outlined in
Sectionfootings 209.4 of the Standard Computation of the quantity shall follow a the horizontal same Structure excavation for and Specifications. seals shall be computed using limit of provisions. Designers shall familiarize themselves with this section of the Standard Specifications. 1 foot 0 inches outside parallel to the lines of the footing or seal or as shown in Anyand limits for structure excavation not neat conforming to the limits specified in the Standard Specifications shall be shown in the Plans. the Plans. The upper limit shall be the ground surface or stream bed as it exists at the time Structure excavation for footings and seals shall be computed using a horizontal limit of 1 foot the excavation is started. (B), and (C). 0 inchesSee outsideFigure and parallel 12.2.5-1(A), to the neat lines of the footing or seal or as shown in the Plans. The
Figure 12.2.5-1
upper limit shall be the ground surface or stream bed as it exists at the time the excavation is started. See Figure 11.2.6-1(A), (B), and (C).
BRIDGE DESIGN MANUAL
Criteria Quantities
Computation of Quantities
Structure excavation for the construction of wing walls shall be computed using limits shown in Figure 11.2.6-2.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 

Figure 11.2.6-3 When bridge approach fills are to be constructed in the same contract as the bridge, and the foundation conditions do not require full height fills to be placed prior to the construction of the pier, the approach fill is constructed in two stages, i.e., constructed up to the bottom of footing or 1 foot above the bottom of footing, and then completed after the bridge construction. (The Materials Laboratory Geotechnical Services Branch shall be  11.2-3 consulted on the staging method.) The structure excavation shall be computed from the top of the first stage fill.
The bottom of a spread footing will be placed 1 foot 0 inches below the top of the first stage fill. See Figure 12.2.5-4(A). The bottom of footings supported on piling will be placed at the top of the first stage fill; therefore no structure excavation is required (see Figure 12.2.5-4(B)). The limits for stage fills shall be shown in the Plans with the structure excavation, if any.
Page 12-4
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Figure 11.2.6-4(A). TheThe bottom ofoffootings on piling will placed at the toptheoffirst the first Figure 11.2.6-4(A). bottom footings supported supported0on piling will bebe placed at top of stage The bottom of aofspread footing will inches below ofthe the fill. Seestage The bottom a spread footing willbebeplaced placed 11 foot foot 0 inches below thethe toptop of the firstfirst stagestage fill. See fill; therefore, no structure excavation isisrequired (seeFigure Figure 11.2.6-4(B)). fill;11.2.6-4(A). therefore, noThe structure excavation required (see 11.2.6-4(B)). Figure bottom of footings supported on piling will be placed at the top of the first stage
Figure 11.2.6-4(A). The bottom of footings supported on piling will be placed at the top of the first stage Quantities, Costs, and The Specifications fill; therefore, no excavation isisin required (see Figure 11.2.6-4(B)). fill; therefore, nofills structure excavation required (see Figure 11.2.6-4(B)). The limits for structure stage fills shall shown in the Plans Plans with the excavation, if any. limits for stage shall bebeshown the with thestructure structure excavation, if any. Chapter 12 The limits for stage shall shownininthe the Plans Plans with excavation, if any. The limits for stage fillsfills shall bebeshown withthe thestructure structure excavation, if any.

Prior to pier when fullFigure height fill with or without required 11.2.6-4 Priorconstruction, to pier construction, when(1) (1) a a full height fill with or without surcharge surcharge is required foris settlement, Figure 11.2.6-4 or (2) theor original ground line is ground above the line finishis grade line, the structure excavation shall bethe computed to for settlement, (2) the original above finish grade line, upper Prior to pier construction, when (1) a full height fill with or without surcharge is required for settlement, Figure 11.2.6-4 1 foot 0 inches below the finish grade (pavement) line (see Figure 11.2.6-5). Prior to pier construction, when (1) a full height fill with or without surcharge is required for settlement, limit of structure excavation shall be computed to line, 1 foot 0 inches below finish grade or (2) the original ground line is above the finish grade structure excavation shallthe be computed to or (2)1to the original line is (1) above theheight finishfill grade line, structure excavation shall be computed to foot 0 inches below the finish grade (pavement) line (see 11.2.6-5). Prior pier construction, when a full with orFigure without surcharge is required for settlement, (pavement) line (see ground Figure 12.2.5-5). 1orfoot 0 inches below the finish line (see 11.2.6-5). (2) the original ground line isgrade above(pavement) the finish grade line,Figure structure excavation shall be computed to 1 foot 0 inches below the finish grade (pavement) line (see Figure 11.2.6-5). Figure 12.2.5-5
BRIDGE DESIGN MANUAL Figure 11.2.6-5
Criteria
Figure 11.2.6-5
Quantities 12.2.5.B Special Excavation
Computation of Quantities Figure 11.2.6-5
B. Special Excavation
Figure 11.2.6-5 The excavation necessary for placement of riprap around bridge piers is called Special The excavation necessary for placement of riprap around bridge piers is called Special Excavation Excavation (see Figure 12.2.5-6). 11.2-4 
(see Figure 11.2.6-6).
11.2-4 excavation shall be computed from the top of the seal to the existing stream  Special bed Special excavation shall be computed from the top of the seal to the existing stream bed or ground or ground line along the slopes indicated in the Plans. Special excavation will only include line outside along the the slopes indicated in the Plans. Special excavation will only include excavation outside excavation limits of structure excavation.
11.2-4
the limits of structure excavation.
The limits for special excavation shall be shown in the Plans.
The limits for special excavation shall be shown in the Plans. 11.2-4 Figure 12.2.5-6
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
C. Shaft Excavation
Figure 11.2.6-6
Page 12-5
Chapter 12
12.2.6
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Shoring or Extra Excavation, Class A Shoring, cofferdams or caissons, or extra excavation required for construction of bridge footings and reinforced concrete retaining walls constructed in the wet or dry is classified as Shoring or Extra Excavation, Class A. See Standard Specifications Section 2-09.3(3). Structural shoring (for dry excavation) or cofferdams (for wet excavation) is required for all excavations near completed structures (foundations of bridges, walls, or buildings), near underground utilities, near railroad tracks, and near pavement. All other excavation four feet or more in depth shall be either shored with structural shoring or cofferdams, or shall meet the open-pit excavation requirements as specified in Standard Specifications Section 2-09.3(3)B. For the purpose of estimating the cost for shoring or extra excavation, Class A, it is necessary to compute the peripheral area of an assumed sheet pile enclosure of the excavated area. While payment for Shoring or Extra Excavation, Class A, is made at a lump sum contract price, the costs are a function of the overall height of excavation. In general, each side of the excavation for each pier shall be categorized into an average overall height range as shown on WSDOT Form 230-031 (i.e., less than 6 feet, 6 to 10 feet, 10 to 20 feet, or greater than 20 feet), the area for the side computed using the appropriate width times the average overall height, the overall area for the side shall be entered in the category that matches the side’s average overall height. These calculations are required for each pier of the bridge as applicable. See accompanying Figure 12.2.6-1 and sample calculation. For excavation in the dry, the peripheral area shall be the perimeter of the horizontal limits of structure excavation times the height from the bottom of the footing to the ground surface at the time of excavation. For excavation in water, the peripheral area shall be the perimeter of the horizontal limits of structure excavation times the height from the bottom of the seal to 2 feet above the seal vent elevation. For shaft-type excavations, it is not normally necessary to compute the area for shoring because the shoring is usually accommodated by the work items for permanent casing, temporary casing, and casing shoring.
Page 12-6
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
For excavation in water, the peripheral area shall be the perimeter of the horizontal limits of structure excavation times the height from the bottom of the seal to 2 feet above the seal vent elevation.
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications Chapter 12 For shaft-type foundations, it is not necessary to compute the area for shoring because the cost for shoring is normally included in the contract price for shaft excavation.
Figure 12.2.6-1
Sample Calculation:
Figure 11.2.6-7
For this pier (Figure 12.2.6-1): Side A:
average height = (4 + 6)/2 = 5 feet width = 15 feet area = 5 × 15 = 75 square feet
Side B:
average height = (6 + 15)/2 = 10.5 feet width = 20 feet area = 10.5 × 20 = 210 square feet
Side C:
11.2-6
average height = (10 + 15)/2 = 12.5 feet width = 15 feet area = 12.5 × 15 = 187.5 square feet
Side D:
average height = (4 + 10)/2 = 7 feet width = 20 feet area = 7 × 20 = 140 square feet
For this example Height Category less than 6 feet 6 feet to 10 feet 10 feet to 20 feet greater than 20 feet
Area 75 square feet 140 square feet 210 + 188 = 398 square feet N.A.
These numbers would be entered on WSDOT Form 230-031 as follows: Item Description Shoring or Standard Item Item Use Extra Excavation, Class A Dry: Number 4012 Standard Item Average Overall Height Pier 6 ft 6 ft to 10 ft Example
Quant. (Enter Total for Bridge Here) 10 ft* to 20 ft
Unit of Meas. L.S. 20 ft S.F.
75 S.F.
140 S.F.
398 (11.5*) S.F.
— S.F.
S.F. S.F. S.F.
S.F. S.F. S.F.
S.F. S.F. S.F.
S.F. S.F. S.F.
* Indicate Average Height WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-7
Chapter 12
12.2.7
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Piling The piling quantities are to be measured and paid for in accordance with Standard Specifications Sections 6-05.4 and 6-05.5. Computation of piling quantities shall follow the same provisions. Timber test piles are driven outside the structure limits and are extra or additional piling beyond the required number of production piling. See Standard Specifications Section 6-05.3(10). Concrete or steel test piles are driven within the structure limits and take the place of production piling. In this case, the quantity for number and length of production piling is reduced by the number and length of test piling. The quantity for “Furnishing _____ Piling _____” is the linear measurement of production piling below cut-off to the “estimated” pile tip (not “minimum” tip) specified in the Geotechnical report. (Does not include test piles.) The quantity for “Driving _____ Pile _____” is the number of production piling driven. (Does not include test piles.) Pile tips are required if so specified in the Geotechnical report. The tips on the test piles are incidental to the test pile; therefore, the number of pile tips reported on the Bridge Quantities Form 230-031 should not include the number of pile tips required on the test piles.
12.2.8
Conduit Pipe It is WSDOT practice to embed two 2-inch diameter conduit pipes in all exterior concrete barriers constructed on bridges and retaining walls. The only exceptions to this practice are inside barriers of side-by-side twin bridges, and other project specific locations with the approval of the Bridge Design Engineer. Only WSDOT electrical systems may use these conduit pipes. Conduit pipes for other private utilities cannot be embedded in structure elements, and must be otherwise suspended or attached to the structure, in accordance with the franchise lease agreement negotiated between the private utility and the Region’s Utility Engineer. In accordance with Standard Specifications Section 8-20.1(1) and RCW 19.28.161, conduit pipe installation work is considered electrical work that can only be performed by licensed electricians. As such, conduit pipe quantities can only be included in electrical work bid items, such as electrical lump sum bid items for “Illumination System”, “Traffic Signal System”, and “Communication System”, or stand-alone unit contract bid items for “Conduit Pipe 2 In. Diam.” Conduit pipe quantities cannot be made incidental to structural bid items such as “Superstructure”, “Traffic Barrier”, “Pedestrian Barrier”, etc. For bridges and retaining walls in projects that also include other electrical system work for illumination, traffic signals, and ITS systems, the conduit pipes and their associated junction boxes shall be included in the lump sum bid item cost estimates for the appropriate electrical system lump sum bid item. For bridge and retaining walls in projects without any electrical system work (e.g., the conduit pipes are isolated and will exist initially as spares), the conduit pipe quantity shall be calculated for “Conduit Pipe 2 In. Diam”, per linear foot. The measurement shall be the sum of all conduit pipe through the barriers and into the ground mounted junction boxes buried off the ends of the bridge corners as shown in the traffic barrier standard details. Each conduit pipe shall terminate in a separate junction box as shown in these details.
Page 12-8
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.2.9
Chapter 12
Private Utilities Attached To Bridge Structures As mentioned above, conduit pipes for private utilities cannot be embedded in structure elements, and must be otherwise suspended or attached to the structure, in accordance with the franchise lease agreement negotiated between the private utility and the Region’s Utility Engineer. Because attachment of private utilities to bridge structures are subject to franchise lease agreements, the construction costs for furnishing and installing these utilities, including all associated supports, need to be kept separate from other bid items. The only portion of the utilities and their supports that can be made incidental to structure bid items, such as “Superstructure” and “Bridge Deck” are the concrete inserts cast into the deck slab of the bridge. All other quantities for the private utilities, including the support rods, braces, and conduit pipes, shall be included in the associated bid item(s) established for each separate private utility, whether as a lump sum bid item, or measured by linear measurement. These separate bid item(s) for these private utilities are the responsibility of the Design PE Office. The same practice applies to WSDOT conduit pipes when such conduit pipes for ITS or other systems are suspended or attached to the structure. Other than the concrete inserts for support of such WSDOT conduit pipes, all other quantities for external WSDOT conduit pipe systems shall be included in the appropriate WSDOT electrical system lump sum bid item, under the responsibility of the Design PE Office or the Region Traffic Design Office.
12.2.10
Drilled Shafts Constructing shafts is measured by the linear foot. The linear measurement is calculated using the top of shaft elevation and the bottom of shaft elevation for each shaft as shown in the Plans. This quantity covers all elements of shaft construction (including excavation and casing and access tubes for non-destructive QA testing of shafts) except for rock excavation and shaft QA testing as outlined below. Rock excavation for shaft including haul is measured by the cubic yards of shaft excavated. The cubic yards shall be calculated based on the shaft diameter shown in the Plans, the top of rock line, defined as the highest bedrock point within the shaft diameter, and the bottom of shaft elevation shown in the Plans. Shaft QA test is measured once for each shaft tested. For establishing bid item quantities for the Proposal, it is always assumed that each shaft will be eligible for testing, so the quantity becomes one for each shaft in the project.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-9
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.3
Construction Costs
12.3.1
Introduction The construction costs itemized in Appendix 12.3-A1, 12.3-A2, 12.3-A3, and 12.3-A4 are to aid the user in estimating the cost of bridge and structure projects. The costs are based on historical data maintained by the Bridge and Structures Office and retrieved from recent WSDOT Contracts. Requests for cost estimates from WSDOT Region Offices and other Local Agency offices should be submitted in writing (hard copy or email) to the Bridge Project Support Unit, and a written or email response will be returned within a reasonable time based on the schedule needs of the requesting office. Scoping or prospectus type cost estimates, and other cost estimates based upon deck area cost history and other readily available geotechnical information and project parameters can be prepared relatively quickly. Estimates requiring input from the Bridge Design Unit, either for preparation of preliminary quantities or other preliminary structural analysis will take longer to prepare. Telephone requests for cost estimates from WSDOT Region Offices and other Local Agency Offices shall be referred to the Bridge Project Support Unit for response. All cost estimates prepared by the Bridge and Structures Office should have the concurrence of the Bridge Project Support Engineer.
12.3.2
Factors Affecting Costs 12.3.2.A
Type of Structure
Many factors, as outlined in Section 2.2.3, must be considered in the selection of the type, size, and location of a bridge or wall. Common structures with conventional details will be within the low end and mid-range of costs. Unique or complex structures will be within the high end. 12.3.2.B
Location of Project Site
Projects in remote areas or with difficult access will generally be within or above the high end of the cost range. 12.3.2.C
Size of Project Contract
Small projects tend to be within the high end of the cost range while large projects tend to be within the low end of the cost range. 12.3.2.D
Foundation Requirements
Foundation requirements greatly affect costs. Water crossings requiring pier construction within the waterway are generally very expensive. Scour requirements can push the costs even higher. The earlier foundation information can be made available the more accurate the cost estimate will be. The Bridge Project Support Unit should be made aware of unusual foundation requirements or changes to foundation type as soon as possible for updating of the estimate. 12.3.2.E
Sequencing of Project
Projects with stage construction, detours, temporary construction, etc., will be more expensive. Page 12-10
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.3.3
Chapter 12
Development of Cost Estimates Estimates prepared by the Bridge and Structures Office shall include 10 percent mobilization but not sales tax, engineering, construction contingencies, or inflation. 12.3.3.A
Types
12.3.3.A.1
Prospectus and Project Summary Estimates
Conceptual cost estimates are prepared when little information about the project is available. Use the construction costs in Appendix A, assuming the worst case conditions, unless actual conditions are known. An example of a worst case condition is deep foundation substructure (pile supported footings or shaft foundations). In remote areas, or for small projects, use the high end of the cost range. Use mid-range costs for usual conditions. To cover unforeseen project modifications, add a 20 percent estimate contingency to a prospectus estimate and a 10 percent estimate contingency to a project summary estimate. These contingencies can be adjusted depending on the preliminary information available. 12.3.3.A.2
Preliminary Design Estimates
Preliminary design estimates are prepared during the preliminary design stage when the type and size of bridge is known. Limited foundation information is sometimes available at this stage. The construction costs in Appendix A shall be used with an appropriate inflation factor, assuming the worst case conditions, unless foundation conditions are known, along with a minimum of 10 percent contingency to cover scope creep. 12.3.3.A.3
Estimate Updates During Design
During the design period, the designer should keep the Bridge Project Support Unit informed of significant changes to the design that might affect the cost. Examples of significant changes are: deeper than expected footing and seals, use of deep foundations (shafts or piles) when none were previously expected, change of substructure types, and changes to superstructure. This is a critical element in the project budgeting process. 12.3.3.A.4
Contract Estimates
The contract estimate is prepared by the Bridge Project Support Unit after the Plans and Final Quantities have been submitted to the Bridge Project Support Unit for preparation of the final Bridge PS&E. The contract estimate is prepared using the quantities furnished by the Bridge Design Unit, unit bid prices from Appendix A, other historical data, and the judgment of the engineer preparing the estimate. Unique, one-of-a-kind projects require special consideration and should include an appropriate construction cost contingency.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-11
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.3.3.B
Responsibilities
12.3.3.B.1
Bridge Project Support Unit
The Bridge Project Support Unit is responsible for preparing the prospectus, project summary, preliminary, and final contract estimates and updating the preliminary estimate as needed during the design phase of the project. The Bridge Project Support Unit assists the WSDOT Region Offices and other outside Local Agency Offices, such as counties and cities, to prepare prospectus and project summary estimates when requested in writing. 12.3.3.B.2
Designer
The designer is responsible for providing preliminary quantities and final quantities to the Bridge Project Support Unit to aid in the updating of preliminary estimates and the preparation of contract estimates. 12.3.3.C
Documentation
Whenever a cost estimate is prepared by the Bridge and Structures Office for an outside office, a Cost Estimate Summary sheet (Appendix 12.3-B1) shall be filled out by the Engineer preparing the estimate. The Cost Estimate Summary shall be maintained in the Job File. During the design stage, the summary sheet shall be maintained by the Bridge Design Unit. At a minimum, the Cost Estimate Summary should list the initial and all subsequent cost estimates for each Preliminary Plan distribution made. It is the Design Unit Manager’s responsibility to ensure the summary sheet is up to date when the job file is submitted to the Bridge Project Support Unit for preparation of the Bridge PS&E. 12.3.3.D
Cost Data
12.3.3.D.1
General
The Bridge costs summarized in Appendix A represent common highway, railroad, and water crossings. Consult the Bridge Project Support Unit for structures spanning across large rivers or canyons and other structures requiring high clearances or special design and construction features. The square foot costs are useful in the conceptual and preliminary design stages when details or quantities are not available. The various factors affecting costs as outlined in Section 12.3.2 must be considered in selecting the square foot cost for a particular project. As a general rule, projects including none or few of the high-cost factors will be close to the mid-range of the cost figures. Projects including many of the high-cost factors will be on the high side. The user must exercise good judgment to determine reasonable costs. During the preliminary stage, it is better to be on the prudently conservative side for budgeting purposes. 12.3.3.D.2
Deck or Wall Face Area
The area to be used for cost estimates based upon deck or wall face area shall be computed as follows:
Page 12-12
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.3.3.D.3
Chapter 12
Bridge Widenings and New Bridges
The deck area of bridges is based on the actual width of the new portion of the bridge deck constructed (measured to the outside edge of the bridge deck) times the length, measured from end of wingwall to end of wingwall, end of curtain wall to end of curtain wall, or back to back of pavement seat if there are no wingwalls or curtain walls. Wingwalls are defined as walls without footings which are cast monolithically with the bridge abutment wall and may extend past the abutment footing. Curtain walls are defined as walls that are cast monolithically with the bridge abutment wall and footing and only extend to the edge of footing. 12.3.3.D.4
Bridge Rail Replacement
The bridge rail and curb removal is based on the total length of the rail and curb removed. 12.3.3.D.5
Bridge Lengths With Unequal Wingwalls
If a bridge has wingwalls or curtain walls of unequal length on opposite sides at a bridge end of wingwalls or curtain walls on one side of a pier only, the length used in computing the square foot area is the average length of the walls. If the wingwalls are not parallel to the centerline of the bridge, the measurement is taken from a projected line from the end of the wingwall normal to the centerline of the roadway. 12.3.3.D.6
Retaining Walls
If retaining walls (walls that are not monolithic with the abutment) extend from the end of the bridge, the cost of these walls is computed separately. The area of the wall is based on the overall length of the wall, and the height from the top of footing to the top of the wall.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-13
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.4
Construction Specifications and Estimates
12.4.1
General The Bridge Project Support Unit prepares the specifications and estimates (S&E) for all structural projects designed or reviewed by the Bridge and Structures Office. The preparation includes distributing review sets, reviewing the job file, plans, PS&E check list, “Not Included in Bridge Quantities List,” and Geotechnical report; preparing the cost estimates, specifications, and working day schedules; and submitting the PS&E package to the Region.
12.4.2
Definitions 12.4.2.A
Standard Specifications
The Standard Specifications is published annually by the WSDOT Engineering Publications Office, is maintained by the WSDOT Construction Office, and is used as the governing construction specification for all WSDOT construction projects. 12.4.2.B
Mandatory General Special Provisions
Mandatory General Special Provisions are revisions to specific sections of the Standard Specifications, which are enacted during the year period that a specific edition of the Standard Specifications is in force. Mandatory General Special Provisions are published throughout the year as immediate needs for specification additions and revisions arise. 12.4.2.C
Special Provisions
Special Provisions are supplemental specifications and modifications to the Standard Specifications, which apply to a specific project. 12.4.2.D
Addendum
A written or graphic document, issued to all bidders and identified as an addendum prior to bid opening, which modifies or supplements the bid documents and becomes a part of the contract. 12.4.2.E
AD Copy
The AD copy is the contract document advertised to prospective bidders. The AD Copy may include, but not be limited to, the following as component parts: Bid Proposal Form, Special Provisions, Amendments, Plans, and Appendices including test hole boring logs, and environmental permit conditions. 12.4.2.F
As defined in Standard Specifications Section 1-02.4
The order of precedence of AD Copy components is as follows: Addenda, Bid Proposal Form, Special Provisions (including Mandatory General Special Provisions, Plans, Standard Specifications, and Standard Plans.
Page 12-14
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.4.3
Chapter 12
General Bridge S&E Process 12.4.3.A
Typical Reviews and Milestone Dates
The Ad Date, as established by the Region, is the anchor for all project schedule dates. The Scope Of Work Agreement (SOW) is a document negotiated between the Design PE Office and the Bridge and Structures Office establishing the deliverables (design submittals) to be produced and the due dates for the various deliverable review milestones for the specific project. The Structural Submittal Expectations Matrix at www.wsdot.wa.gov/publications/fulltext/ ProjectMgmt/DEM/Bridge.pdf outlines the expected content of the design submittal deliverables at specific stages of design development. When a Constructability Review is set by the SOW, the Bridge Design Unit or Bridge Consultant assigned to the project is responsible for providing the plan content specified by the design matrix, and providing the quantities based on preliminary foundation design sizes. The Bridge Project Support Unit is responsible for providing the cost estimate and a set of Special Provisions that includes all applicable General Special Provisions (GSPs). The GSPs with fill-ins need not have the fill-in text included at this time, and project specific Special Provisions need not be included at this time. The Bridge Design Unit or Bridge Consultant shall coordinate with the Bridge Project Support Unit with enough lead time to allow completion of the cost estimate and Constructability Special Provisions in time for the Constructability Review submittal to the Region Design PEO. For the PS&E Review Set turn-in, the Bridge Design Unit or Bridge Consultant assigned to the project shall provide completed plans and quantities to the Bridge Project Support Unit at least two-weeks in advance of the scheduled PS&E Review turn-in date. The Bridge Project Support Unit is responsible for developing a complete set of Special Provisions, with completed GSPs and project specific special provisions, and a complete cost estimate. For hydraulic, mechanical, and electrical rehabilitation projects for movable bridges, the Bridge Preservation Office takes a lead role in managing the design process for the project. 12.4.3.B
Constructability Review Set Distribution
The Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer assigned to the project distributes the Constructability Review set, consisting of PDFs of the Structure Plans, cost estimate, and assembled bridge special provision document (raw GSPs), and the Word document of the associated special provision runlist, to the following:
• Design Project Engineer
• Bridge Design Unit Supervisor
• Design PEO Team Leader
• Bridge Design Unit Team Leader/ Designer
• Design PEO Designer
• Region Plans Office Reviewer
The Bridge Design Unit Team Leader/Designer and Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer for the project participate in the Constructability Review and coordinate to address review comments generated by the review.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-15
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.4.3.C
PS&E Review Set Distribution
The Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer assigned to the project distributes the PS&E Review set to the following:
• Design Project Engineer
• Design PEO Team Leader
• Design PEO Designer
• Region Plans Office Reviewer
• Region Design Engineering Manager or equivalent
• FHWA Washington Division Bridge Engineer
• Materials Laboratory (Record of Materials and PS&E Distribution mailbox)
• HQ Construction Office Bridge Engineer
• Bridge Project Support Manager
• Bridge Preservation Office (Review mailbox)
• Bridge Design Unit Supervisor
• Bridge Design Unit Team Leader/Designer
• State Bridge Design Engineer
• State Bridge and Structures Engineer
• Bridge Scheduler The content of the distribution set is defined by Section 12.4.9.A. The Bridge Design Unit Team Leader/Designer and Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer for the project participate in the PS&E Review and coordinate to address review comments generated by the review.
12.4.4
Reviewing Bridge Plans The Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer performs the following tasks after receiving the Structure Plans and associated quantities from the Bridge Design Unit or Bridge Consultant in advance of the PS&E Review set distribution: 12.4.4.A
Job File
Review correspondence and emails in the job file for the items of work and other commitments which need to be included in the Bridge PS&E. Identify items that need special provisions and bid item references. Identify items that require additional research by, and information from, the bridge designer, Region designers, or others. Confirm that the job file fly leaf information has been completed by the designer (Form 221-076). 12.4.4.B
PS&E Check List (Form 230-037 and Appendix 12.4-A1)
Review the form as completed by the bridge designer for identified needs for special materials, construction requirements, permits, etc., which may need Special Provisions such as:
• Permits: United States Coast Guard
• Agreements: utilities on bridge, etc.
• Materials: high strength structural steel, high-strength concrete, polyester and polymer concrete, carbon fiber wrap, high-load elastomeric bearing pads and other high capacity bridge bearings, etc. Page 12-16
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Chapter 12
• Construction Requirements: temporary access, stage construction, construction over railroad, special welding and welding inspection requirements, and other special construction requirements
• Special Items: modified concrete overlay or special architectural, paint, and sealer treatments
• Proprietary Materials: identification of, and justification for use of, products and materials which are specified in the Structure Plans by specific manufacturer and model, instead of generic manufacture 12.4.4.C
Summary of Quantities (Form 230-031 and Appendix 12.2-A1)
Verify that the Summary of Quantities is labeled as “Manager’s Bridge Quantities.” See Section 12.2.2. Quantities listed in this form are used to develop the Bridge Cost Estimate for the project. 12.4.4.D
Plans
Review the plans for consistency with the special needs identified by the bridge designer in the PS&E check list form (subsection B above), use of standard notes and General Notes, completeness of title block information, and use of terminology consistent with the Standard Specifications, Standard Plans, and Standard Bid Items. 12.4.4.E
Not Included in Bridge Quantities List (Form 230-038 and Appendix 12.1-A1)
Review the form completed by the bridge designer and compare with the Structure Plans for items shown in the Structure Plans that may be missing from the list. See Section 12.1.2. 12.4.4.F
Geotechnical Report
Review the Geotechnical Report for the project to confirm that the foundation types, sizes, and elevations shown in the Bridge Plans are consistent with the recommendations specified in the Geotechnical Report. Obtain a copy of the final Geotechnical Report for the S&E file. Review the Geotechnical Report for construction consideration requirements which may need to be noted in the Special Provisions, such as shaft casing requirements, bridge embankment settlement periods, special excavation, etc. Compare the number of test holes and the locations shown in the layout sheets for all bridges against number and locations of test holes identified in the final Geotechnical Report.
12.4.5
Preparing the Bridge Cost Estimates 12.4.5.A
General
From the quantities shown in the Summary of Quantities form submitted with the Structure Plans (whether for Constructability Review or PS&E Review), the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer develops the Bridge Cost Estimate for the project. The Bridge Project Support Unit uses a standard spreadsheet format for Cost Estimates. This spreadsheet includes the tabulation of all bridge bid items, a breakdown for each lump sum item, and square foot cost of the structure.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-17
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.4.5.B
Procedure
Each quantity shown in the Summary of Quantities form is to be matched with an appropriate unit bid item or lump sum bid item. These can be Standard Bid Items from the Standard Bid Item Table, or project specific non-standard bid items. Pricing for the bid items above can be based on the Construction Cost Estimating Aids listed in Appendices 12.3-A1, 12.3-A2, 12.3-A3, and 12.3-A4, bid tabulations from previous contracts, and the Unit Bid Analysis and Standard Item Table listing available through the WSDOT Contract Ad & Award Office web site. The Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer uses appropriate engineering judgment to make appropriate adjustments for inflation, site location, quantities involved, total of the work involved, etc. All Standard Bid Items listed in the spreadsheet shall include the Standard Bid Item number assigned to that bid item. All non-standard bid items shall be identified by the appropriate pre-qualification code for the bid item work. The pre-qualification codes specified in the Standard Item Table should be reviewed to help establish the appropriate code for non-standard bid items. When in doubt, the general Bridge and Structures prequalification code of (B0) should be used. All bridge cost estimates shall include mobilization, but do not include sales tax, engineering, contingencies or inflation.
12.4.6
Preparing the Bridge Specifications 12.4.6.A
General
There are two categories of Special Provisions: 1.
General Special Provisions (GSP’s) are supplemental specifications which are standardized and approved for Statewide use, and maintained by the WSDOT Construction Office. GSP’s are formatted to supplement specific Standard Specifications Sections. GSP’s are identified by their publication and effective date in parenthesis immediately preceding the GSP text.
2.
Project Specific Special Provisions include all supplemental specifications which are not GSP’s. Project Specific Special Provisions, as the name implies, are intended for project specific use, whether one time or infrequent. The vast majority of Project Specific Special Provisions are formatted to supplement specific Standard Specifications Sections. However, in rare cases, they can be formatted as “standalone” following the “Description/Materials/Construction Requirements/ Measurement/Payment format. Project Specific Special Provisions are identified by six asterisks in parenthesis immediately preceding the text or heading. A Project Specific Special Provision that sees frequent use can be standardized and elevated to GSP status.
12.4.6.B
Procedure
Based on review of the Structure Plans and the PS&E Check List, the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer determines the items of work which are not already covered by the Standard Specifications and for which supplemental specifications are needed. Based on this determination, and review of the current list of GSP’s, a Bridge Special Provision runlist is prepared, listing the multi-character code of the applicable GSP documents needed for the project. GSP documents are listed in the WSDOT Construction Office web site. Page 12-18
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Chapter 12
These documents are listed following the section order of the Standard Specifications. Fillin blanks for GSP’s requiring project specific information can be completed at this time. When the Standard Specifications and GSP’s are insufficient to cover project specific requirements, Project Specific Special Provisions are developed, and added by name at the appropriate location in the runlist. See the Plans Preparation Manual Division 6 for further discussion and example flow charts. When the Bridge Special Provision file is complete with all Special Provisions needed to accompany the Structure Plans, the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer compiles a single space document of the Bridge Special Provision file for use in the Bridge PS&E distribution.
12.4.7
Preparing the Bridge Working Day Schedule 12.4.7.A
General
The Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer calculates the number of the working days necessary to construct the bridge portion of the contract, based on the quantities shown in the Summary of Quantities form submitted with the Bridge Plans, and enters the time in the special provision “Time for Completion.” The working days are defined in the Standard Specifications Section 1-08.5. 12.4.7.B
Procedure
The first task of estimating the number of working days is to list all the construction activities involved in the project. These include all actual construction activities such as excavation, forming, concrete placement, and curing; and the non-construction activities such as mobilization, material and shop plan approval. Special conditions such as staging, limited access near wetlands, limited construction windows for work in rivers and streams, limited working hours due to traffic and noise restrictions, require additional time. The second task is to assign the number of working days to each construction activity above (see Appendix 12.4-A2). The “Construction Time Rate” table can be used as a guide to estimate construction time required. This table shows the average rate of output for a single shift, work day only. Adjustment to the rates of this table should be made based on project size, type of work involved, location of the project, etc. In general, larger project will have higher production rates than smaller projects, new construction will have higher production rates than widening, and unstaged work will have higher production rates than stages work. The last step is to arrange construction activities, with corresponding working days, into a construction schedule on a bar chart, either by hand on the Construction Working Day Schedule Form 230-041 (see Appendix 12.4-B1) or by computer using a scheduling program. List the activities in a logical construction sequence, starting from the substructure to the superstructure. Items shall overlap where practical and the critical path shall be identified.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-19
Chapter 12
12.4.8
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Reviewing Projects Prepared by Consultants 12.4.8.A
General
Consultants preparing Structure Plans for WSDOT projects submit their Plans and quantities to the Bridge and Structures Office before the scheduled Bridge PS&E turn-in date, and with all associated information (files, forms, lists, and reports), as specified in Sections 12.4.3 and 12.4.4. The package shall be in the same format as those prepared by the Bridge and Structures Office. 12.4.8.B
Procedure
The Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer reviews the consultant’s Structure Plans following the process as specified in Sections 12.4.3 and 12.4.4. The review comments of the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer are combined with review comments from the Bridge Design Unit assigned to review the project, and returned to the consultant in a timely manner through the Bridge Consultant Liaison Engineer, allowing the consultant to meet the scheduled turn-in date for the Bridge PS&E. After the consultant addresses all review comments and resubmits the package as 100 percent complete, the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer compiles the Bridge PS&E package (See Section 12.4.9). Except for hydraulic, mechanical, and electrical rehabilitation projects for movable bridges, and other unique bridge projects where specifically approved by the Bridge Project Support Engineer, all Bridge Special Provisions shall be prepared by the Bridge Project Support Unit. The Bridge Cost Estimate and working day schedule should be prepared by the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer with assistance from the consultant as appropriate.
12.4.9
Submitting the PS&E Package 12.4.9.A
General
The PS&E package includes: 1.
PDF of Bridge Construction Cost Estimate for each separate structure
2.
PDF of Cost Estimate Summary for each separate structure (see Appendix 12.3-B1)
3.
PDF of Not Included in Bridge Quantity List
4.
PDF of Construction Working Day Schedule
5.
PDF of compiled Bridge Special Provision document with runlist
6.
Word document of individual project specific Bridge Special Provisions and GSPs with fill-ins, and Word document of the associated runlist
7.
PDF of the Structure Plan Set for all Structures
The Bridge PS&E is distributed to those identified in Section 12.4.3.B.
Page 12-20
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
12.4.10
Chapter 12
PS&E Review Period and Turn-in for AD Copy
12.4.10.A Description The PS&E Review Period between Bridge PS&E turn-in and Ad Date allows the Region to compile PS&E from their Design PE Office and all support groups into a Review PS&E set for distribution to appropriate parties for review and comment. The process ensures that all parts of the PS&E are compatible, complete, and constructible. 12.4.10.B Procedure Each Region has its own specific process, but the general procedure is similar. The PS&E Review PS&E set is distributed to the Bridge Project Support Engineer or the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer assigned to the project. The review is performed, and comments returned to the Region, by the due date specified in the distribution document. Review comments are returned to both the Region Plan Reviewer and the Region Design PE Team Leader/Designer assigned to the project. Depending on the scope of the project, and the Region responsible for the project, there may be a meeting to discuss review comments. If such a meeting is held (generally about halfway through the PS&E review period), the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer and others from the Bridge Design Unit responsible for the project, should consider attending if discussion of Bridge PS&E review comments is likely. Shortly after the specified due date for review comments passes, Region comments on the Bridge PS&E should be received by the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer and/or the bridge designer(s) in the Bridge Design Unit. These review comments on the Bridge PS&E are addressed before the final Bridge PS&E is turned-in for AD Copy printing. The Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer makes all necessary revisions to the Bridge Cost Estimate and Bridge Special Provisions, and notifies the appropriate contacts in the Region Design PE Office and the Region Plans Office when these changes are complete. This should be completed at least two weeks prior to the scheduled Ad Date. After the Bridge Design Unit has completed all necessary revisions to the Structure Plans, the Structure Plans are signed and turned in to the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer. Copies of these signed plans, together with the final set of bridge special provisions and the associated Certified Bridge Special Provisions and Cost Estimate document stamped and signed by the Bridge Specifications and Estimates Engineer for the project, comprise the Bridge AD-Ready PS&E. This set of Bridge AD-Ready PS&E is the "Signed PS&E Set" deliverable of the Structural Submittal Expectations Matrix, and is sent to the Region (Region Plan Reviewer and Region Design PE Team Leader/Designer) for use in compiling the AD Copy PS&E. The Bridge Construction Support Engineer is also included in this email distribution as notice of the AD-Ready status of the project. This should be completed two weeks prior to the scheduled Ad Date.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-21
Chapter 12
Structural Estimating Aids Construction Costs 
Chapter 12

Quantities, Costs, and Specifications

See SPECIAL NOTE on Appendix 12.3-A1 for updates and additional resources on unit costs.
Page 12-32
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Appendix 12.3-A3
Chapter 12
Structural Estimating Aids Construction Costs 
A. Permits and Regulations Coast Guard B. Railroads Railroad Bridge Railroad in Vicinity C. Order of Work Approach embankment settlement period Stage construction sequence D. Traffic Control Reduction in traffic lanes Traffic within feet of new construction Traffic detoured, no traffic on bridge One way traffic on bridge E. Utilities and Existing Pavement Utilities on Bridge, type Existing utilities in vicinity of construction Existing pavement in vicinity of construction F. Falsework Falsework opening over existing roadway Falsework opening over railroad Falsework opening over water Protection of falsework Supported from existing structure Not supported from existing structure Special falsework release sequence required DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
G. Foundation
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-37
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
G. Foundation Excavation near existing pavement Excavation near railroad track or facilities Concrete Seals Seal construction using a berm Cofferdams Pumping water from foundation excavation required Riprap at piers Removal of unsuitable material Rock excavation requiring threshold limit value Special Excavation
H. Forms Special forms for architectural treatment Fractured Fin Finish Variable depth random board finish 3/4 inch random board finish Remove forms from cells which have access (Box grider) I.
Piles Concrete test pile Concrete piling inch diameter Steel test pile Steel piling Timber Test Pile Timber piling Pile loading test Pile minimum tip elevations Pile splice Pile tip Preboring for pile Driving piles in highly developed business or residential areas Excavation for pile Driving from existing structure No driving from existing structure Overdriving of piles
J. Shafts Required permanent casing Required temporary casing Casing shoring Shaft Seal CSL access tubes DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
K. Prestressed Concrete Griders
Page 12-38
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
J. Shafts
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Chapter 12
DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
K. Prestressed Concrete Griders Epoxy - coated prestressing steel Temporary strands f'c 28 days > 8,500 psi Precast prestressed member Spliced prestressed concrete girder Prestressed concrete tub girder
L. Superstructure Concrete class Post - tensioning tendons Elastomeric bearing pads (pad only) Elastomeric bearing pad assembly (fabricated assembly) Fabric pad bearing Disc bearing Spherical bearing Cylindrical bearing Electrical Conduit Expansion joint
M. Steel Structure Structural Carbon Steel Structural Low Alloy Steel Structural H.S. Steel Steel Casting A - 307 Fasteners M - 164 Fasteners F-1554 Fasteners Shop Assembling Notch Toughness Requirements Application of Paint - Color No. Steel Erection
N. Timber Structures Untreated Creosote treated Salt treated Glulam deck panels Type and grade of timber Fire prevention requirement needed
DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
O. Signing and Lighting
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-39
Chapter 12
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
O. Signing and Lighting Navigation lighting system Temporary navigation light Sign bridge on structure Cantilever sign structure on bridge Bridge mounted sign brackets P. Drainage System Special bridge drains Bridge grate inlets Downspout Q. Surface Finish Fractured fin finish Sandblast finish Variable depth random board finish 3/4 inch random board finish Pigmented sealer R. Special Classes of Concrete Concrete Class EA Concrete Class HE S. Bridge Widening or Replacement Complete removal of existing structure Removing portions of existing structure Salvage Materials, storage site , salvage item Coating contrete surface with epoxy resin Drilling holes Core drilled holes Set rebar with epoxy Use of rockbolts or rock anchors Grout, comp. strength psi at day, location As built Plans of existing structure available for bidder's inspection HMA overlay LMC overlay Polyester concrete overlay Bridge deck repair Further deck preparation Explosive prohibited Explosives allowed
DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
T. Waterproofing
U. Miscellaneous Items
Page 12-40
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Chapter 12
DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
T. Waterproofing Membrane waterproofing (Deck Seal)
U. Miscellaneous Items Temporary oak blocks Poured rubber Expaned polstyrene Plastic waterstops Expanded rubber Butyl rubber sheeting Grout, comp. strength Electrical conduit
psi at
day, location
V. Metal Bridge Railing Bridge Railing Type BP Bridge Railing Type
W. Repair Work Epoxy Crack Sealing Timber Redecking Concrete Deck Repair
X. Other Items Ceramic Tiles Sturctural Earth Wall Tieback Wall Noise Barrier Wall Winter Conditions Work Access Work hours or seasonal restrition Work Bridge Detour Bridge
DOT Form 230-037 EF Revised 07/2011
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 12-41
Chapter 12
Appendix 12.4-A2 Operation
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Structural Estimating Aids Construction Time Rates Units**
Min. Output
Ave. Output
Max. Output
Structure Exc. & Shoring
CY/DAY
20
80
150
*Seals
CY/DAY
10
15
20
*Footings
CY/DAY
6
10
14
*Abutment Walls
CY/DAY
4
7
19
*Wingwalls
CY/DAY
1
1.5
2
*Retaining Walls with Footings
CY/DAY
4
11
17
*Columns
CY/DAY
3
4
8
Falsework for X-beams
CY/DAY
4
10
13
*X-beams
CY/DAY
16
18
20
Precast Concrete
DAYS
40
30
20
Cast-in-Place Concrete
DAYS
15
5
2
Steel
DAYS
30
10
2
Timber
DAYS
20
5
2
EACH/DAY
1
1
2
Concrete
LF/DAY
100
150
200
Steel
LF/DAY
100
150
200
Timber
LF/DAY
100
150
200
Shafts
DAYS
2
3
4
Driving Soldier Pile
DAYS
2
3
4
Permanent Ground Anchor
EACH
1
4
10
MBM/DAY
1
2
4
SF/DAY
100
800
1500
Soil Nail
EACH
1
4
10
Shotcrete Facing
SF/DAY
1200
3000
6000
Girder Fabrication
DAYS
70
45
35
Set Girders
LF/DAY
200
550
1,450
*Slab & Diaphragms
CY/DAY
6
11
18
Substructure
Furnishing Piles
Driving Piles Driving Test Piles
Soldier Pile Walls
Timber Lagging Concrete Fascia Panel Soil Nail Walls
Superstructure Prestressed Girders
*Concrete **All times are based on a single crew with 8-hour work DAYS
Page 12-42
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Quantities, Costs, and Specifications
Operation
Chapter 12

Chapter 13 13.1
13.2
Bridge Load Rating

WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Chapter 13 13.1
Bridge Load Rating
General Bridge load rating is a procedure to evaluate the adequacy of various structural components to carry predetermined live loads. The Bridge Load Rating Engineer in the WSDOT Bridge Preservation Office is responsible for the bridge inventory and load rating of existing and new bridges in accordance with the National Bridge Inspection standards (NBIS) and the AASHTO Manual for Bridge Evaluation (MBE), latest edition. Currently, only elements of the superstructure will be rated, however, if conditions warrant, substructure elements may need to be rated. The superstructure shall be defined as all structural elements above the column tops including drop crossbeams. Load ratings are required for all new, widened, or rehabilitated bridges where the rehabilitation alters the load carrying capacity of the structure. Load ratings shall be done immediately after the design is completed and rating calculations shall be filed separately per Section 13.4 and files shall be forwarded to WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer. The Bridge Preservation Office is responsible for maintaining an updated bridge load rating throughout the life of the bridge based on the current condition of the bridge. Conditions of existing bridges change over time, resulting in the need for reevaluation of the load rating. Such changes may be caused by damage to structural elements, extensive maintenance or rehabilitative work, or any other deterioration identified by the Bridge Preservation Office through their regular inspection program. New bridges that have designs completed after October 1, 2010 shall be rated based on the Load and Resistance Factor Rating (LRFR) method per the MBE and this chapter. NBI ratings shall be based on the HL-93 truck and shall be reported as a rating factor. For bridges designed prior to October 1, 2010, partially reconstructed or rehabilitated bridges where part of the existing structure is designed by the Allowable Stress Method (ASR) or by the Load Factor Method (LFR), NBI ratings can be based on either the LFR or Load Resistance Factor Rating (LRFR) methods. The rating factors shall be based on HS loading and reported in tons when using the LFR method. For State owned structures, verify with WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer regarding which load rating method to use for bridges designed prior to October 1, 2010. By definition, the adequacy or inadequacy of a structural element to carry a specified truck load will be indicated by the value of its rating factor (RF); that is, whether it is greater or smaller than 1.0.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-1
Chapter 13
13.1.1
Bridge Load Rating
LRFR Method per the MBE 13.1.1.A
Capacity of member ƒR = Allowable Stress per LRFD DC = Dead load due to structural components and attachments DW = Dead load due to wearing surface and utilities P = Permanent loads other than dead loads LL = Live load effect IM = Dynamic load allowance (Impact) *γDC = Dead load factor for structural components and attachments γDW = Dead load factor for wearing surface (ACP/HMA) and utilities γP = Load factor for permanent load γLL = Live load factor φc = Condition factor φs = System factor φn = Resistance factor based on construction material * for concrete overlays use γDC
When rating the full section of a bridge, like a box girder or 3D truss, or crossbeams, with two or more lanes, the following formula applies when rating emergency vehicles and  −  −  ±   13.1.1A-1  = overload trucks.   (1+)
13.1.1A-2

(13.1.1A-2)
The formula above assumes that there is one overload truck occupying one lane, and one ± of the legal trucks occupying each − of theremaining lanes. Trucks shall be placed in the 13.1.2-1  =  (1+)  lanes in a manner that produces themaximum forces. The live load factor for both of the legal truck and permit truck shall be equal and are dependent on the permit truck. The 50 13.1.2-2  = corresponds LLlgl shown in the equation above to the maximum effect of the legal truck(s). (125+)
13.1.1.B
Condition Factor (φcc)
13.1.2-3
C−γDL D±S LL (LL+LLlgl )(1+IM)
 = γ
Condition factor is based on the Bridge Management System (BMS) condition state of the element per the most recent inspection report. The engineer should consider the quantity ′  − state  + +   the notes describing the condition of of each element in a fair or poor condition and 13.1.2-4  = an element when determining the appropriate  (1+)condition factor. Structural Condition of Member0.60′ −  + +      Condition = Good or13.1.2-5 Satisfactory, BMS 2 (1+) 1 or Fair, BMS Condition 3 0.40′ −12  + +  Poor, BMS Condition 4
13.1.2-6
13.1.2-7 Page 13-2
13.1.2-8
 =
 =
 =
φc 1.00 0.90 0.85
 (1+)
0.80∗ −  + +   (1+)
0.90∗ −  + +   (1+)
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
13.1.1.C
Chapter 13
System Factor (φs)
The system factor shown in the table below applies to flexure and all axial forces; use a system factor of 1.00 when rating shear. Super Structure Type Welded Members in Two Girder/Truss/Arch Bridges Riveted Members in Two Girder/Truss/Arch Bridges Multiple Eyebar Members in Truss Bridges Three-Girder Bridges with Girder Spacing 6′ Four Girder Bridges with Girder Spacing ≤ 4′ All Other Girder and Slab Bridges Floorbeams with Spacing >12′ and Noncontinuous Stringers Redundant Stringer Subsystems Between Floorbeams Cross Beams with a one or two columns, moment
13.1.1.D
φs 0.85 0.90 0.90 0.85 0.95 1.00 0.85 1.00 0.85
Dead and Live Load Factors Inventory Operating Legal & NRL HL-93 HL-93 Loads Bridge Type Limit State
γDW
γp
1.25 1.50
--
1.75
1.35
Table 13.1-1
--
Strength II 1.25 1.50
1.0
--
--
--
Table 13.1-1
Strength I
1.25 1.50
1.0
1.75
1.35
Table 13.1-1
--
Prestressed Strength II 1.25 1.50 Concrete Service III 1.00 1.00
1.0
--
--
--
Table 13.1-1
1.0
1.00
--
1.0
1.0
Service I
1.00 1.00
1.0
--
--
--
1.0
Strength I
1.25 1.50
1.0
1.75
1.35
Table 13.1-1
--
Strength II 1.25 1.50
1.0
--
--
--
Table 13.1-1
Service II
1.0
1.3
1.0
1.30
1.0
Reinforced Concrete
Steel
Strength I
γDC
Permit & EV*
1.00 1.00
For prestressed concrete elements, the Service III rating for Legal Loads, and Service I rating for permit loads are optional per the MBE. Service ratings can be ignored at the discretion of the Load Rating Engineer if the structural elements being rated show no evidence of distress/cracking. Girders that have high load hits shall be rated for Service. 13.1.1.E
Live Load Factors for Legal and Permit Loads Table 13.1-1 Truck Legal & NRL Permit EV*
Live load Factor γLL γLL γLL
ADTT ≤ 1000 1.30 1.20 1.30
ADTT > 1000 1.45 1.20 1.30
ADTT Unknown 1.45 1.20 1.30
*Emergency Vehicle
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-3
Chapter 13
Bridge Load Rating
In cases where RF for legal loads is less than 1, which would require the bridge to be posted, live load factors may be reduced (interpolated based on ADTT), per Section 6A.4.4.2.3 of the MBE. Number of Lanes
Multiple Presence Factor
1 Lane
= 1.2
2 Lanes
= 1.0
3 Lanes
= 0.85
> 3 Lanes
= 0.65
The table above shows the Multiple Presence Factors based on the number of loaded lanes. For cases where a permit truck or an emergency vehicle is combined with legal trucks, the multiple presence factor for the total number of loaded lanes in each case shall be applied to all loads. For cases where a permit truck is loaded in a single lane with no other trucks present, the multiple presence factor for 1 lane does not apply. If the Live Load distribution factor for single lane based on the Lever Rule controls, the multiple presence factor for 1 lane isn’t applicable. Dynamic Load Allowance (Impact) Dynamic load allowance is dependent on the approach onto the bridge and condition of the deck and joints based on the latest inspection report. IM
NBI Element 7681
BMS Flag 322
Inventory
33%
N/A
N/A
Operating
33%
N/A
N/A
33%
N/A
N/A
Smooth Riding Surface Along Approach onto the Bridge, Bridge Deck and Expansion Joints
10%
8
1, 2 or none
Minor Surface Deviations and Depressions
20%
6
3
Severe Impact to the Bridge
30%
3
4
Truck HL 93 (All Span Lengths):
Legal, Permit Trucks & Emergency Vehicles: Spans 40′ or less Legal, Permit Trucks & Emergency Vehicles Spans greater than 40′:
Verify the conditions of the deck and joints to identify any deficiencies in the deck that would cause impact to the structure. For potholes less than 1″ deep use 20 percent impact, and use 30 percent impact for depths greater than 1″. For multi span bridges, take into consideration the type and location of the deficiency and whether Impact would be applicable to the entire structure or not. If the Inspection report has no NBI Code 7681 or BMS Flag 322, then assume Smooth approaches.
Page 13-4
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
Chapter 13
Live Loads The moving loads shall be the HL-93 loading, the AASHTO legal loads (including three AASHTO trucks and lanes where applicable and notional rating load), the two WSDOT overload vehicles (See Figures 13.1-1 and 13.1-3 thru 13.1-9) and the two Emergency Vehicles (See Figures 13.1-10 & 13.1-11). Inventory and operating ratings shall be calculated for the HL-93 truck. In cases where the rating factor for the Notational Rating Load (NRL) is below 1.00, then the single unit vehicles (SUV) shall be evaluated for posting, see MBE for SUV configurations.
13.1.2
Load Factor Method (LFR) The load factor method can be applied to structures designed prior to . Ratings shall be performed per the MBE. Capacities, resistance factors, and distribution ൫஼ିఊವ಴ ஽஼ିఊವೈ ஽ௐേఊ೛ ௉൯ factors shall be based on the AASHTO 13.1.1A‐1 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ Standard Specifications 17th edition.
13.1.2.A
Ultimate Method (LFR) 13.1.1A‐2 13.1.2.A.1 Rating Equation 13.1.2‐1 Where: RF C Φ D LL S IM γDL γLL
13.1.2.B
ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ
ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ
ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ
஼ିఊವ಴ ஽஼ିఊವೈ ஽ௐേఊ೛ ௉ିఊಽಽ ௅௅೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ஍஼ିఊವಽ ஽േௌ
ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ
(13.1.2-1)
ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ
= Rating factor = Nominal member resistance = Resistance factor based on construction material = Unfactored dead loads = Unfactored live loads = Unfactored prestress secondary moment or shear = Impact = Dead load factor for structural components and attachments = Live load factor
Dead and Live Load Factors
Dead load factor= 1.30 Live load factor= 2.17 (Inventory) = 1.30 (Operating) 13.1.2.C
Impact (IM) Truck Design and Legal loads (Inventory & Operating) Permit Loads: Smooth Riding Surface Along Approach onto the Bridge, Bridge Deck and Expansion Joints Minor Surface Deviations and Depressions Severe Impact to the Bridge
NBI Element 7681 N/A
BMS Flag 322 N/A
10%
8
1, 2, or none
20% 30%
6 3
3 4
IM Span dependent
If the inspection report has no NBI Code 7681 or BMS Flag 322, then assume smooth approaches.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-5
13.1.1A-2 13.1.1A-2 Chapter 13
<= <? A 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = :'; >:'; >@ ±;A B (DD6 DD<? EFE ) (56GH) 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = ;;CC<= (DD6 DD ) (56GH) CC
EFE
Bridge Load Rating I%'()2 +±J 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = (I%'( 13.1.2-1 +±J )2 33 (5678) 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 13.1.2-1 22−  ±    −= ( − 33dependent: (5678) loads =  −isspan  ±   Impact (IM) for13.1.1A-1 design and legal 22   (1+) 13.1.1A-1  =   (1+) 13.1.2-2 MN 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼C−γ 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 = 13.1.2-2 DC−γDW DW ±γP P (13.1.2-2) DC(5OM63) 13.1.1A-2  = C−γ DC−γ DW ±γP P (LL+ LLDW lgl ) (1+IM) 13.1.1A-2  = γγLLDC >±P LL:'; (1+IM) Where: lgl ) <C 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅LL=(LL+ 13.1.2-3 :';<C >±P ; (DD6DD CC EFE )(56GH) 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =  13.1.2-3 L is equal to span length − ;CC± (DD6DDEFE )(56GH) 13.1.2-1  = − ±  (1+) 13.1.2-1  =   (1+)   like When rating the full section of a bridge, a box girder or 3D truss, or crossbeams, QR S T' $UV 6U/ 6UW 1 S ' $U 6U 6U 1 QR 50 V / applies W which have two13.1.2-2 or more lanes, the following when rating emergency Tformula 13.1.2-4 = =𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 50 UX (5678) 13.1.2-4 = (125+) 13.1.2-2 vehicles or overload trucks.  =𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 (5678) U X (125+) S ' $U 6U 6U 1 N.ZNR C−γ D±S V / W DL S T 13.1.2-5  =𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = N.ZNR 13.1.2-3 ' $UV6U/ 6UW 1 (13.1.2-3) T)(1+IM) (5678) U (LL+LL γ LL = lgl X 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 13.1.2-5 13.1.2-3 UX (5678)
The formula above assumes that there is N.[NR oneSoverload '5\O $UV 6Utruck 6U 1 occupying one lane, and ′ −  + ST' 5\  $U 6U/ 6UW 1 + =   13.1.2-6 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 N.[NR  V / W T one of the legal trucks occupying each remaining lanes. Trucks shall be placed in O ′of the (5678) U  + X+  13.1.2-6 13.1.2-4  =𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅= −(1+) (5678) U  X  13.1.2-4that produces  = the maximum the lanes in a manner forces. The LLlgl shown in the equation  (1+) ∗ ' $U 6U 6U 1 N.]NR ^ V / W above corresponds to the maximum effect of∗the legal6Utrucks(s). The γLL corresponds to 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =′N.]NR 13.1.2-7 ' $U 0.60 − ^+ V 6U W1  +  / (5678) Xis =′ −and 13.1.2-7 13.1.2-5  =𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 0.60 +  U+ the live load factor for the overload truck the same for both legal and overload   UX (5678)  (1+) 13.1.2-5  = (1+)   trucks. The same multiple presence factorN.`NR for∗ 'the total number of lanes loaded should be ^∗ $UV 6U/ 6UW 1 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =′N.`NR ' $U 6U 0.40 −12^ + +  W1 V / 6U applied to all loads. 13.1.2-8 X (5678) =′ −12U 13.1.2-8  =𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 13.1.2-6 0.40 + +     UX (5678)  (1+) 13.1.2-6  =  (1+) 13.1.2.D Resistance Factors (LFR) MethodUa 'UV 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =∗ −Ua 13.1.3-1 'UV +  0.80   UX + =∗ −  13.1.3-1  =𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 13.1.2-7 0.80 + +the  U The resistance 13.1.2-7 factors for NBI ratings shall latest AASHTO Standard X per (1+)  be =  (1+) Specifications. Following are the NBI resistance factors assuming the member 0.90∗ −  + +  is in good condition: 13.1.2-8  = 0.90∗ −(1+)  + +   13.1.2-8  = (1+)   Steel members:				1.00 (Flexure)  − 					1.00 (Shear) 13.1.3-1  = − 13.1.3-1  =  Prestressed concrete			 1.00 (Flexure, positive moment) 					0.90 (Shear) Post-tensioned, cast-in-place:		 0.95 (Flexure, positive moment) 					0.90 (Shear) Reinforced concrete:			 0.90 (Flexure) 					0.85 (Shear) For prestressed and post-tensioned members, where mild reinforcing steel is used to resist negative moment, the resistance factors for reinforced concrete section shall be used in the ratings. In cases where there is deterioration in a member, the cross section shall be reduced based on the inspection report. For cases where deterioration in members is described in general terms, reduce resistance factors of member by 0.10 for BMS Condition State of 3, and reduce resistance factors by 0.20 for BMS Condition State of 4. The engineer should consider the quantity of each element in a fair or poor condition state and the notes describing the condition of an element when determining the appropriate resistance factor.
Page 13-6
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ವ಴ ವೈ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ೛೛೛஼ିఊ ሺଵାூெሻ ವ಴ ವೈ ஼ିఊವ಴ ஽஼ିఊವೈ ஽ௐേఊ ௉ିఊಽಽ ௅௅೗೒೗ ವ಴ ವೈ ܴ‫ܨ‬ 13.1.1A‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ವ಴஽஼ିఊ ವೈ ೛௉ିఊ ಽಽ௅௅ ೗೒೗ሺଵାூெሻ ஽ௐേఊ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ൫஼ିఊ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ೛ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.1A‐1 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ೛13.1.1A‐2 ൫஼ିఊ ஽஼ିఊ ஽ௐേఊ ௉൯ ஽஼ିఊ ஽ௐേఊ 13.1.1A‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ಽಽ ఊఊఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛௉൯ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ൫஼ିఊ ஽஼ିఊ ஽ௐേఊ ௉൯ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ವೈ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ఊఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ಽಽ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ఊ ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ಽಽ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.1A‐1 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ஍஼ିఊ ವ಴ ಽಽ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ஍஼ିఊ ஽േௌ 13.1.1A‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ಽಽ ಽಽ ఊಽಽ ವಽ ಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐1 ఊ ವಽ ஽േௌ ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ஼ିఊವ಴ ஽஼ିఊವೈܴ‫ܨ‬ ஽ௐേఊ ௉ିఊ ௅௅஽േௌ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ൌ ೛஍஼ିఊ ಽಽವಽ ೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ஍஼ିఊ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌ ఊ஍஼ିఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ஽േௌ ವಽ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ಽಽ ஍஼ିఊ ஽േௌ ವಽ ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ஽஼ିఊ ஽ௐേఊ ௉ିఊ ௅௅ Bridge Load Rating Chapter 13 ఊ஍஼ିఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ವಽ ஽േௌ ವಽ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ஼ିఊ ஽஼ିఊ ஽ௐേఊ ௉ିఊ ௅௅ ವಽ ವಽ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ೛ఊ೛೛೛ఊ௉ିఊ ವ಴஽஼ିఊವೈ ವೈ ಽಽವಽ ೗೒೗ሺଵାூெሻ ஼ିఊವ಴ ஽ௐേఊ ௅௅஽േௌ ವ಴ ವೈ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ஍஼ିఊ ஽േௌ ஍஼ିఊ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ൌൌ ಽಽ ವ಴ ವೈ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ஍஼ିఊ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ವಽ ஽േௌ ಽಽ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ሺଵାூெሻ ܴ‫ܨ‬ ஽஼ିఊ ஽ௐേఊ ௉ିఊ ௅௅ ఊ஼ିఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ሺଵାூெሻ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ஽஼ିఊ ஽ௐേఊ ௉ିఊ ௅௅ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ఊ஼ିఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐1 ൌ ಽಽ ವ಴ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ವೈ ೛ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ವ಴ ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ఊఊಽಽ ಽಽ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ఊ 13.1.1A‐2 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ಽಽ ହ଴ ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ହ଴ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ ܯܫ‬ൌ ఊହ଴ ஍஼ିఊವಽ ஽േௌ ಽಽ ఊఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ 13.1.2.E Service (LFR) Method ହ଴ ಽಽ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ ܯܫ‬ൌ Method ହ଴ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ13.1.2‐2 ହ଴ ವಽ ஽േௌ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ஍஼ିఊ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ൌ ൌ ହ଴ହ଴ ହ଴ ஍஼ିఊ ஽േௌ ‫ܯܫ‬ ൌ ఊ஍஼ିఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ ವಽ஽േௌ ವಽ ହ଴ ಽಽ ವಽ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ൌ ൌ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ವಽ ହ଴ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ ൌ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ஍஼ିఊ ஽േௌ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ ൌሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ஍஼ିఊ ஽േௌ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ ൌ ವಽ Prestressed and members in positive moment regions, and where postಽಽpost-tensioned ವಽ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ಽಽ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ஼ିఊ ಽಽ ஼ିఊ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ 13.1.2‐1 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ವಽ ஽േௌିఊಽಽ ௅௅೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ஽േௌିఊಽಽ ௅௅೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ହ଴ ಽಽ ఊఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ 13.1.2‐3 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ಽಽ ሺଵାூெሻ over the supports, shall also be rated basedಽಽ on allowable stresses ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐3tensioning ܴ‫ ܨ‬is ൌ continuous ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅ ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ஽േௌିఊ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ௅௅ 13.1.2‐2 ൌ 13.1.2‐3 ವಽ ಽಽ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ሺଵାூெሻ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅‫ܯܫ‬ ವಽ ೗೒೗ ஼ିఊ ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ହ଴ವಽ ವಽ஽േௌିఊ ಽಽ௅௅ ೗೒೗ሺଵାூெሻ ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅ ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ܴ‫ܨ‬ൌൌ஼ିఊ ହ଴ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ 13.1.2‐3 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ହ଴ ሺଵାூெሻ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ ൌൌ ஼ିఊ ሺଵାூெሻ ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅ 13.1.2‐3at service ܴ‫ܨ‬loads. ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ The rating factor between service shall be ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ವಽఊ ಽಽ methods ೗೒೗ ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ఊultimate ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ ܯܫ‬ൌ ൌ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ ಽಽ ହ଴ ఊఊlowest ಽಽ ହ଴ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ಽಽ ହ଴ 13.1.2‐3 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ and ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐3 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ಽಽ ಽಽ ಽಽ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ ܯܫ‬ൌ ൌ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐2 ‫ܯܫ‬ ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ఊఊಽಽ ಽಽ ಽಽ the governing inventory rating. ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ᇲ ሺଵଶହା௅ሻ ஼ିఊವಽ ஽േௌିఊಽಽ ௅௅೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ଺ට௙ ೎ ି൫ி೏ ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ ᇲ ି൫ி ାி ାி ൯ ଺ට௙ ೏ ೛ ೞ ܴ‫ܨ‬ ೎ ஽േௌିఊ 13.1.2‐3 ൌ13.1.2‐4 ሺଵାூெሻ ஼ିఊ ଺ට௙ᇲᇲᇲᇲᇲ ೎ି൫ி ି൫ி೏೏೏ାி ାி ାி ವಽ ಽಽ ௅௅೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ஼ିఊವಽ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ೞ൯൯ ଺ට௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ஼ିఊ ௅௅ ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ଺ට௙ ᇲᇲᇲ ି൫ி ವಽ஽േௌିఊ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ೛೛ାி ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅ ఊ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ೛ ଺ට௙ ାி ᇲ ಽಽ ଺ට௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ൯ ೏ ೞೞೞೞ൯൯ ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ 13.1.2‐4 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ಽಽ ଺ට௙ ାி ାி ൯ ೏ ାி೛ ೛ ೏ାி೛ ೛ାிೞೞೞೞ൯ ܴ‫ܨ‬ 13.1.2‐3 ೏ ೛ ଺ට௙ ି൫ி ி೎೎೎೎೗ᇲᇲᇲି൫ி ೎ ೎ ᇲሺଵାூெሻ ೏ ೏ ೛ 13.1.2‐3 ൌ ೎ ሺଵାூெሻ ೎ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ௅௅ ሺଵାூெሻ ଺ට௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ൯ ிವಽ 13.1.2‐4ఊఊಽಽ ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ವಽ ಽಽ௅௅೗೒೗ ೗೒೗ሺଵାூெሻ ஼ିఊ ஽േௌିఊ ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ 13.1.2.F Inventory Rating ఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ೏ ೛ ೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ଺ට௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ೏ ೛ 13.1.2‐4 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ಽಽ ೎ ವಽ ಽಽ ೗೒೗ ೎ ೏ ೛ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ೏ ೛ ೞೞೞೞ൯ ೎೎ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐4 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ 13.1.2‐3 13.1.2‐4 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ಽಽ ಽಽ ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ிிி೗೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ி 13.1.2‐4 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ሺଵାூெሻ ி ಽಽ ఊఊಽಽ ௅௅ሺଵାூெሻ ಽಽ ಽಽ ሺଵାூெሻ ிி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ᇲ ೎ ି൫ி ଺ට௙ ᇲ ೎ ି൫ி೏Concrete ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ Compression: ೏ ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ᇲ ೎ ି൫ி೏ ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ Concrete Tension: 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ܨ‬൯൯ ൌ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ᇲᇲᇲ ି൫ி ᇲᇲᇲᇲ ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ᇲ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ି൫ி ାி೛ ାிೞೞೞೞ൯൯൯ ᇲ ି൫ி ଺ට௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ᇲ 13.1.2‐4 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ଺ට௙ ାி ାி ೏ାி ೛ାி ೏ ೛ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ி೗೎೎೎೎ି൫ி೏ ାி ାி ೏ାி೛ ೛ାிೞೞೞೞ൯ ೏ ೛ ଺ට௙ி೎೎೎೎ି൫ி ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ᇲிᇲᇲ೗೎೎ሺଵାூெሻ ି൫ி೏೏ ାி೛ ାிೞೞೞೞ൯൯ ೏ ೛ ೏ ೏ ೛ ೏ାி ೛ାி ೛ 13.1.2‐5 ೛ ೎೎ି൫ி೏ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ᇲ ି൫ி ାி ାி ൯ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ܨ‬ 13.1.2‐4 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ଺ට௙ ೎ ି൫ி೏ ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ ܴ‫ܨ‬ 13.1.2‐4 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ሺଵାூெሻ ೏ ி ሺଵାூெሻ ி 13.1.2‐4 ൌ ி೗೗೗೗೎ሺଵାூெሻ ೛ ೞ ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ி 13.1.2‐5 (13.1.2-4) (13.1.2-5) ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ி ሺଵାூெሻ ி ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ሺଵାூெሻ ி ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ 13.1.2‐4 ி೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ᇲ ሺଵାூெሻ ᇲ ି൫ி ାி ାி ൯ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ೎ிି೗ଵൗଶ൫ி೏ ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ೏ ೛ ೞ ೎ 13.1.2‐6 ଴Ǥସ଴௙ᇲᇲ ିଵଵൗ ൫ி ାி ାி ൯ ᇲᇲᇲ ି൫ி 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ଵൗ೏ ାி ଵ ᇲ೎ ᇲ ிି ଵ ൫ி೛ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ାிೞ೛ ାிೞೞೞೞ൯൯ൌ 13.1.2‐6 ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ிᇲᇲᇲᇲ೗೎೎ሺଵାூெሻ ି൫ி೏ ାி೛ ାி ൯ ൌ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ೎೎ᇲᇲᇲି ൗଵଶଶ൫ி೏೏ାி೛೛ାிೞೞ൯ ೏ାி ೛൯ାி ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ାி ൗଶଶ൫ி ೏ ೛ ೏ାி ೛ାி ܴ‫ܨ‬ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ି൫ி ೏ ೛ ೎೎೎ ି ೏ ೏ ೛ ೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ೞೞೞೞ൯ ൌ ೏ ೛ ೎ 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ܨ‬ (13.1.2-6) ೎ ೎ ൫ி೏೏ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ᇲ ிି ିଵ ାி೛ ାிೞೞೞೞ൯൯൯ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ൗଶ൫ி 13.1.2‐6 ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ൗൗ ᇲ ᇲ ೏ାி ೛ାி ሺଵାூெሻ ೛ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ି ାி ାி 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ 13.1.2‐5 ൌ 13.1.2‐6 ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ି൫ி ାி೛ ାிೞೞೞೞܴ‫ܨ‬ 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ೛ ି൫ி ൯൯൯ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ 13.1.2‐5 ଶ ൫ி೏ ೏ାி ೛ାி ሺଵାூெሻ ೏ ೛ ଴Ǥ଺଴௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ிᇲᇲ೗೎೎೎೎ி ೏ ሺଵାூெሻ ೏ ೛ ி ሺଵାூெሻ ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ‫ כ‬ி೎೎೎೎೗ி೗ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ி ೗ሺଵାூெሻ ೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ி ೗ ೗ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ 13.1.2‐5 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ሺଵାூெሻ ሺଵାூெሻ $%ᇲ ' (ଵ)* +%' (), +-± (/೤ ି൫ி 01 ி೏೗೗೗೗ାி ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ி ೛ ାிೞ ൯ ሺଵାூெሻ ி Prestressing Steel Tension: ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ି ൗଶ൫ி೏ ାி ೛ ାி ‫ି כ‬൫ி ାி ାி ൯ 13.1.1A-1 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = $% 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌೞ ൯+-± ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ‫ככככ‬೤ି൫ி ᇲ‫ି כ‬ଵൗ ൫ி ାி ାி $%೎ᇲᇲᇲᇲ' ' ( +%' ( +-± ( 01 13.1.2‐7 ೏ାி ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ି൫ி ାி ାிೞೞೞೞೞ൯൯ 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ )* ), / ( +%' ( ( 01 ೤ ೏ ೛೛ାி ଵ ( 33 (5678) )* ), / ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ሺଵାூெሻ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ൯ ೤ ೏ ೛ ଵ ி ), / ೤ )* ), / ೤೗ ‫ ככ‬೏ ೏ ೛ ೛ ଵ)* ൫ி೏ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ାி ାி ൯ ೎ି൫ிଶ೏ ାி೏ ଴Ǥ଼଴௙13.1.1A-1 ାி೛ೞ ൯ ೞ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ೏ାி ೛ ൫ி ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ାி ൗൗଶଶ22 ೏ ೛ ೤ ೛ ೞೞൌ 13.1.1A-1 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = ೎೎ி೎೎ିି೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ‫ିככ‬൫ி ೏ ೛ ೞೞ൯ ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ = ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ି൫ி ାி೛ ାிೞೞೞೞ൯൯൯ 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ଵൗ ൫ி೛ ାி 13.1.2‐7 ଵ ೤ ೏ାி ೛ାி ሺଵାூெሻ ೤ ೏ ೛ ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ி ᇲᇲᇲᇲ ି ଵ 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ೤ ೏ ( 33 (5678) ሺଵାூெሻ ଴Ǥସ଴௙ ି ାி ൯ ೤ ೏ ೛ ೗ ி (13.1.2-7) 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ 22 ( 33 (5678) ೏ ೛ ೞ ሺଵାூெሻ ൫ி ೗ ାி ାி ൯ 22 ൗ ሺଵାூெሻ ி ೏ ೛ ଶ ೏ 22 22 ೏ ೛ ೛ ೞೞೞ ೗ ଶ ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ‫ כ‬೗೗೗ிி ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ி ೎೎ሺଵାூெሻ ி೎೗೎ி 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ி 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐6 ܴ‫ܨ‬ (5678) %' (), +-଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ± (/೤0'( 33೛:;: ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗22 ି൫ி ାி ାிೞ ൯ ‫ି כ‬൫ி ሺଵାூெሻ ி೗೗೗೗೏ሺଵାூெሻ ‫ *)( כ‬+%' ி ೏ ሺଵାூெሻ ி ଴Ǥଽ଴௙೤ ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = %' 13.1.1A-2 ೤ ି൫ி ೏ ାி ೛ ାி ೞ൯ ൌ ‫ି כ‬൫ி 33 13.1.2‐8 ܴ‫ܨ‬ (5678) (5678) ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ାி ାி %' ()* +%' (), +±( (/ 0'( ( ( +± 33 ‫ככככ‬0'( ‫ିככככ‬൫ி ାி ାி ൯ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ 13.1.2‐8 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ೤ ೏ାி ೛ାி ೞ൯൯ (5678) )* +%' ), / 22 :;: ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி (5678) )* ), / 22 :;: %' ( +%' ( +± ( 0'( 33 ( 33 13.1.2‐7 ‫כ‬ ೤ ೏ ೛ ‫כ‬ 22 :;: ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ି൫ி ሺଵାூெሻ ೤ ೏ ೛ )* ), / 22 ி 22 ‫כ‬ ‫כ‬ ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ൯ ‫כ‬ ೤ ೏ ೛ ೞೞೞೞ൯ ೤೤ ೏೏ ೛೛ ೞೞೞೞ൯ ೤೗ ‫ ככ‬೏ ೛:;: ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ି൫ி ାி೛ ାி ൯ ൌ ೤೗ି൫ி ೏ାி ೛ାி ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ሺଵାூெሻ ೤ ೏ ೛ ி 13.1.2‐8 ܴ‫ܨ‬ 13.1.2.G Operating Rating ೤೗ି൫ி ೏ାி ೛ାி ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ሺଵାூெሻ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = 13.1.1A-2 ೤ ೏ ೛ ி೤ ೤ ೏ ೛ ೞ 13.1.2‐8 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ೏ ೞೞೞೞ൯ ൌ ‫ିככ‬൫ி ೤ ೏ ೛ ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ି൫ி ାி ାி ൯ 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ܨ‬ ‫כ‬ ‫כ‬ ೤ ೏ ೛ ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ାி ାி (5678) ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐8 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ೤ ೏ ೛ ி (5678) ( 33 ‫ିככ‬൫ி 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ 13.1.2‐8 ೏ ሺଵାூெሻ ೏ ೛ ೛ ೞೞೞೞ൯ ଴Ǥ଼଴௙ ି൫ி ାி೛ ାிೞೞೞೞ൯൯ܴ‫ܨ‬ 22 33 (5678) (22 13.1.2‐7 22 ೤ ೏ାி ೛ାி ೤ ೏ ೛ ிி 22 ሺଵାூெሻ ி ೤ ೏ ೤ ೏ ೛ ೗೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ܴ‫ܨ‬ ൌ ிி೗೗೤೗೗೤ிி೗ሺଵାூெሻ ሺଵାூெሻ ೗ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐8 ೗ ிி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ ೗ 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ൌ <%'( +±= ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐7 ܴ‫ܨ‬ )2 ሺଵାூெሻ ೗ ி೗೗೗ ሺଵାூெሻ Prestressing Steel Tension: ிி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = ( <%'( 13.1.2-1 +±= )2 +±= )2 ‫ି כ‬൫ி ାி ାி ൯ 22‫ כ‬33 (5678) )2 )2 13.1.2‐8 ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ = <%'( ೤13.1.2-1 ೏ ೛ ೞ ೤ ି൫ி ೏ ାி೛ ାிೞ ൯ 33 (5678) (5678) 13.1.2‐8 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ 22 33 ((22 22 ‫ିככככ‬൫ி 13.1.2‐8 (13.1.2-8) 22 ଴Ǥଽ଴௙ ି൫ி೏ ାி೛ ାிೞೞೞೞ൯൯ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ ೤ ೏ାி ೛ାி ೤ ೏ ೛ ி೤ ೤ ೏ ೛ ೗ ሺଵାூெሻ ி @A ೗ ሺଵାூெሻ 13.1.2‐8 ܴ‫ ܨ‬ൌ 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 = 13.1.2-2 ሺଵାூெሻ ிி೗೗೗೗ሺଵାூெሻ @A (5B@63) @A Where: 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 = (5B@63) 13.1.2-2 (5B@63)
RF ƒ′c Fd Fp Fs Fl IM ƒy*
13.1.3
(5B@63) (5B@63) = Rating factor %'()2 +±=' (22 33:;: (5678) 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =of %'( 13.1.2-3 = Compressive strength concrete (5678) %'( +±=' (22 33:;: +±=' ( )2 ( 22 33 :;:(5678) )2 22 :;: %'( +±=' ( 33 )2 )2 22 :;: 22 33(5678) 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = = 13.1.2-3 13.1.2-3 = Dead load stress 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 ( 33(5678) ( 33(5678) 22 33(5678) 22 (22 22 = Prestressing stress CD E F' $GH 6G/ 6GI 1 $GH ' $G 6G/ 6GIIII11 = Stress due to secondary forces CDEEEEFF' 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = prestress 13.1.2-4 CD H /6G 6G H / CD H / GFF: (5678) 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = 13.1.2-4 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = 13.1.2-4 = Live load stress (5678) G:::: (5678) G G E ' $G 6G 6G 1 = Dynamic load allowanceA.KAD (Impact) H / I F 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = A.KAD 13.1.2-5 EEEE ' $G A.KAD ' 6G 6G $G (5678) H / I11 6G 6G G H / F F = Prestressing 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =stress :FF HH // III 13.1.2-5 steel yield
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = 13.1.2-5 (5678) GG:::: (5678) 5M 15 Allowable concrete stress shall be increased percent for overload vehicles. Impact is A.LAD E F 'by B $GH 6G/ 6GI 1 13.1.2-6 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = A.LAD 5M $G 6G 6G 1 A.LADEEEEFG '5 $G H6G/ /6GIIII1 calculated same as ultimate method. ' M (5678) H / F B B H / FF : B H 13.1.2-6 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = (5678) G (5678) G G:::: (5678) A.NADO∗ ' $GH 6G/ 6GI 1 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = A.NAD 13.1.2-7 ∗∗∗∗' $GH A.NAD ' $G 6G/ 6GIIII111 O H6G /6G $G O H / GO O H / : (5678) 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = 13.1.2-7 The allowable stress method is applicable toGG::only timber structures. Impact is not applied (5678) :: (5678) ∗ $G 1 A.QADO ' H 6G/ 6GI to timber structures. 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = A.QAD 13.1.2-8 ∗∗∗∗' $GH A.QAD ' 6G/ 6GIIII111 $G O H6G /6G (5678) $G O H / A.QAD 6G 6G GO O H / :'
Allowable Stress Method (ASD)
13.1.2-8 Rating Equation: Where: RF *Fa Fd Fl
13.1.3-1 13.1.3-1
= Rating factor = Allowable stress = Dead load stress = Live load stress
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =
(5678) (5678) GG:::: (5678) GR 'GH G:
(13.1.3-1)
*Fa, for inventory rating, shall be per AASHTO Standard Specifications. For operating rating, FA shall be increased by 33%
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-7
Chapter 13
13.1.4
Bridge Load Rating
Live Loads Live loads shall consist of: HS20, Type 3, Type 3S2, Type 3-3, NRL, Legal Lane, OL1 and OL2 and EV2 and EV3 (See Figures 13.1-2 thru 13.1-11). The inventory and operating rating factors shall be calculated for all of the rated trucks except EV2 and EV3 where only the operating rating is required. In cases where the operating rating factor for the NRL load is below 1, then the single unit vehicles (SUV) shall be evaluated for posting, see MBE for SUV configurations. Live load reduction factors (LFR Method). Number of Lanes 1 Lane 2 Lanes 3 Lanes >3 Lanes
13.1.5
Reduction Factor = 1.0 = 1.0 = 0.90 = 0.75
Rating Trucks 13.1.5.A
Design Trucks Figure 13.1-1
HL-93 Load (LRFR Method)
For negative moment and interior reaction (Reduce all loads to 90%).
HL-93 Load (LRFR Method) Figure 13.1-1
Page 13-8
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
Chapter 13
Figure 13.1-2
HS-20 Load (LFR Method) 8k
32 k
32 k
*In negative moment regions of continuous spans, place an equivalent load in the other spans to produce maximum effect.
13.1.5.B
Legal Trucks Figure 13.1-3
Type 3 (LRFR & LFR Methods)
Figure 13.1-4
Type 3S2 (LRFR & LFR Methods)
Figure 13.1-5
Type 3-3 (LRFR & LFR Methods)
Figure 13.1-6
Notional Rating Load (NRL) (LRFR & LFR Methods)
V varies from 6′-0″ to 14′-0″
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-9
Chapter 13
Bridge Load Rating
Figure 13.1-7
Legal lane is applicable to Spans over 200’ (LRFR & LFR Methods) Legal lane is applicable to Spans over 200’ (LRFR & LFR Methods) Legal lane is applicable to Spans over 200’ (LRFR & LFR Methods) Legal lane is applicableto toSpans Spans over over 200’ (LRFR && LFR Methods) Legal lane is applicable 200’ (LRFR LFR Methods) Legal lane is applicable to Spans over 200’ (LRFR & LFR Methods) Legal lane is applicabletotoSpans spansover over 200’ 200’ (LRFR (LRFR && LFR Methods) Legal lane is applicable LFR Methods)
Legal lane is applicable to Spans over 200’ (LRFR & LFR Methods)
13.1.5.C
Legal lane for continuous spans and reactions at interior piers (LRFR FR Method) Met Legal lane for continuous spans and reactions at interior piers (LRFR FR Method) Met (LRFR Legal Lane lane for continuous spans and reactions atatinterior piers FR Method) Method) Met Legal for continuous spans and reactions interior pier (LRFR Legal lane for continuous spans and reactions FR Method) Met Figure 13.1-7 at interior piers (LRFR Figure 13.1-7 Figure 13.1-7 Legal reactions FR Met Figure 13.1-7 at (LRFR Legal lane lane for for continuous continuous spans spans and and reactions at interior interior piers piers (LRFR FR Method) Method) Met
Overload Trucks Legal lane for continuous spans and reactions at interior piers (LRFR FR Method) Met
lane for continuous spans and reactions at interior piers (LRFR FR Method) Met Figure OverloadLegal Trucks Figure 13.1-7 13.1-7 Overload Trucks Figure 13.1-7 Overload Trucks Chapter 13 Bridge Load Rating Figure 13.1-7 Figure 13.1-8 Overload 1* (LRFR & LFR Methods) Overload Trucks Chapter 13 Bridge Load Rating Chapter 13
Chapter 13 13 Chapter Overload Chapter 13 Overload Trucks Trucks Chapter 13 Chapter 13 13 Overload Chapter Overload Trucks Trucks
Bridge Load Rating Bridge Load Load Rating Rating Bridge Bridge Load Rating Bridge Load Rating Bridge Load Load Rating Rating Bridge
Overload Trucks Overload Trucks Overload Trucks Overload Overload Trucks Trucks Overload Trucks Overload Trucks
Figure 13.1-9
Overload 11* (LRFR & LFR Methods) Overload 11* (LRFR & LFR Methods) & LFR Overload 11* (LRFR Overload 1* (LRFR & LFRMethods) Methods) (LRFR &13.1-8 LFR Overload 11*Figure 13.1-8 Overload 1*Figure (LRFR & LFRMethods) Methods) Figure 13.1-8 Overload 2* (LRFR LFR Methods) Overload 1*& (LRFR & LFR Methods) 13.1-8 Figure 13.1-8 Overload 1* Figure (LRFR & LFR Methods) Figure 13.1-8 Figure 13.1-8 Overload 1*Figure (LRFR13.1-8 & LFR Methods) Figure 13.1-8 Overload 1* (LRFR & LFR Methods)
13.1-8 Overload 1* Figure (LRFR & LFR Methods) & LFR Overload Figure (LRFR &13.1-8 LFR Methods) Methods) Overload 11* 11* (LRFR Figure 13.1-8 Overload 11* (LRFR & LFR Methods) (LRFR13.1-8 & LFR Methods) Overload 11*Figure Figure 13.1-8 Figure 13.1-8 Figure 13.1-8 Overload 2* (LRFR & LFR Methods)
Overload 2* (LRFR13.1-9 & LFR Methods) Overload 2*Figure (LRFR13.1-9 & LFR Methods) Figure Overload 2* (LRFR & LFR Methods) *When using the LRFR method for the overload trucks, spans greater than 200′ and when checking 13.1-9 Overload 2*Figure (LRFR &for LFR Methods) *When using the LRFR for the overload trucks, for spans greater 200′ and when checking Figure 13.1-9 *When using thenegative LRFR method formethod the overload trucks, for spans greater than 200′ and when moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane loadthan to simulate closely following Overload 2* (LRFR & LFR Methods) Figure 13.1-9 *When using the LRFR method for the overload trucks, for spans greater 200′ andclosely when checking negative moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane loadthan to simulate following Overload 2* (LRFR & LFR Methods) vehicles. Thethe laneLRFR load method can be superimposed ontrucks, top of the permitgreater load. *When using for the overload for spans than 200′ and when checking
checking negative moment continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane load tochecking simulate Figure *When using theinLRFR method for the overload trucks, for spans greater 200′ and when negative moment inload continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft13.1-9 additional lane loadthan to simulate closely *When using method for2* the(LRFR overload for spans greater 200′ and when following checking vehicles. The the laneLRFR can be superimposed ontrucks, top of the permit load. Figure & LFR Methods) negative moment inOverload continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft13.1-9 additional lane loadthan to simulate simulate closely following moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane load to following *When using the LRFR method for the (LRFR overload for spans greater than 200′ andclosely when checking vehicles. The lane load can be superimposed ontrucks, top ofLFR the permit load. closely followingnegative vehicles. The lane load can be superimposed on top of the permit load. & Methods) Overload 2* negative moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane load to simulate closely following *When using method for the overload for spans vehicles. The the laneLRFR load can be superimposed ontrucks, top of the permit greater load. than 200′ and when checking
*When using method for the(LRFR overload trucks, for spans greater 200′ andclosely when checking vehicles. The the laneLRFR load can be superimposed on13.1-9 top the permit load. & LFR Methods) Overload 2* negative continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ftof additional lane loadthan to simulate following vehicles. moment The lanein can be superimposed on top the permit load. negative moment inload continuous spans, apply 0.20 0.20 k/ftof additional lane load to to simulate simulate closely closely following following (LRFR & LFR Methods) Overload 2* Figure Figure negative continuous spans, apply k/ft additional lane load vehicles. moment The laneinload can be superimposed on13.1-9 top of the permit load. Figure vehicles. The The lane lane load load can can be be superimposed superimposed on13.1-9 top of of the the permit permit load. load. vehicles. on top 24 k Figure 33.50 k 13.1-9 15’ 24 k 33.50 k 15’ 24 k 33.50 k 15’ 33.50 k spans greater than 200 feet and when 24 k *When using the LRFR method for24the trucks, for 15’ 15’ k Overload 33.50 k spans greater than 200 feet and when *When using the LRFR method for the Overload trucks, for 15’
Figure 13.1-10
Type EV2 (LRFR & LFR Methods)
(LRFR & LFR Methods) Overload 2* checking negative moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional to simulate *When using the LRFR method for the trucks, for spans greater lane than load 200 feet and when (LRFR & LFR Methods) Overload 2*Overload checking negative moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane load to simulate *When using the LRFR method for the Overload trucks, for spans greater than 200 feet and when (LRFR & LFR Overload closely following The lane 2* load can be13.1-9 superimposed top of the permit checking negativevehicles. moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20Methods) k/ft on additional lane loadload. to simulate Figure (LRFR & LFR Methods) Overload closely following Thecontinuous lane 2* load can be superimposed on top of the permit load. checking negativevehicles. moment in spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane load to simulate Figure 13.1-9 (LRFR &13.1-9 LFR Methods) on top of the permit load. closely following vehicles. TheType laneEV2 load can be superimposed Figure Type EV2 (LRFR & LFR Methods) on top of the permit load. closely following vehicles. TheType laneEV2 load can be superimposed Figure (LRFR &13.1-9 LFR Methods) Type EV2 (LRFR & LFR Methods)
Figure 13.1-11 Type EV3 (LRFR & LFR Methods) *When *When using using the the LRFR LRFR method method for for the the Overload Overload trucks, trucks, for for spans spans greater greater than than 200 200 feet feet and and when when 31 k k/ft *When using the LRFR method for the Overload trucks, for spans greater than 200 feet and when 31 k 0.20 checking negative moment in continuous spans, apply additional lane load to simulate *When using the LRFR method for the Overload trucks, for spans greater than 200 feet and when 24 k checking negative moment in continuous spans, apply 0.20 k/ft additional lane load to simulate checking negative moment in spans, apply additional lane load to closely lane load can superimposed on permit 31 kk/ft 31 k 0.20 checking negativevehicles. moment The in continuous continuous 0.20 additional lane loadload. to simulate simulate closely following following vehicles. The lane load spans, can be be apply superimposed on top top of of the the permit load. 31 kk/ft on 24 kload 31 k closely following vehicles. The lane can be superimposed top of the permit load. 31 k 24 kload can be superimposed 31 k closely following vehicles. The lane on top of the permit load. 31 k 31 k 24 k 24 k
Type EV3 (LRFR & LFR Methods) Type EV3 Figure (LRFR13.1-11 & LFR Methods) Type EV3 (LRFR & LFR Methods) Figure 13.1-11 Type EV3 (LRFR & LFR Methods) Figure 13.1-11 Type EV3 Figure (LRFR13.1-11 & LFR Methods) 13.1-11 Type EV3 Figure (LRFR & LFR Methods) Figure 13.1-11 Type EV3 (LRFR & LFR Methods) Figure 13.1-11 Figure 13.1-11
Page 13-10
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
13.2
Special Rating Criteria
13.2.1
Dead Loads
Chapter 13
Use 155 pcf for weight of the concrete; 140 pcf for weight of ACP/HMA and 150 pcf for concrete overlay. Use 50 pcf for weight of timber. If concrete overlay (LMC) isn't called out on the plans or not provided, assume 1.50 inch thick. Use the dead loads shown in the table below for miscellaneous bridge rails. Bridge Rails and Traffic Barrier Dead Loads
13.2.2
Type of Rail Thriebeam attached to existing rail Thriebeam attached to posts Metal Rail on top of Bridge rail Bridge rail w/openings (doesn't include curb) used In 1920’s thru 1950’s Std. Plan E29, 9.50" high curb includes bridge rail 9" wide curb
Weight in lbs/ft 20 30 20 150
18" wide curb 3' wide sidewalk 4' sidewalk 5' sidewalk 6' sidewalk Std. Plan E29, 11" high curb includes bridge rail 9" wide curb 18" wide curb 3' wide sidewalk 4' sidewalk 5' sidewalk 6' sidewalk Traffic Barriers: 32" F-Shape 42" F-Shape 34" Single Slope 42" Single Slope
465 665 800 935 1100
370
395 510 735 890 1100 1200 460 710 490 670
Live Load Distribution Factors Live load distribution factors shall be per the corresponding AASHTO Specification based on the method used to perform the load rating. For emergency vehicles, when using simplified equations per AASHTO Specifications, use the appropriate equation based on the number of design lanes. In cases where a 3D analysis is performed, or when rating a X-beam, place an EV in one lane and a legal truck in remaining lanes (NRL truck typically controls). For overload trucks, a single lane distribution factor shall be used when rating longitudinal members on per member basis and the multiple presence factor shall be divided out when using the LRFR method. In cases where a 3D analysis is performed, or when rating a X-beam, place an overload in one lane and a legal truck in remaining lanes (NRL truck typically controls).
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-11
Chapter 13
Bridge Load Rating
The number of lanes is dependent on the roadway width. For roadway width less than 18′, assume one lane for all trucks/loads. For roadway width between 18′ and 20′, the number of lanes for legal and permit loads shall correspond to the number of striped lanes on the bridge, and for the design trucks/loads use one lane. For roadway width between 20′ and 24′ use two lanes, each is equal to half the roadway width for all trucks/loads. For roadway width greater than 24′, the number of lanes shall be equal to the integer of the ratio of the roadway width divided by 12 for all trucks/loads.
13.2.3
Reinforced Concrete Structures For conventional reinforced concrete members of existing bridges, the service check shall not be part of the rating evaluation. Rating for shear shall be performed for all rating trucks. Shear capacity shall be based on the Modified Compression Field Theory (MCFT) when using the LRFR method, longitudinal reinforcement should be checked for increased tension caused by shear.
13.2.4
Prestressed Concrete Structures Allowable stresses for concrete shall be per the design specification corresponding to the method used in the rating. Note that for the LRFD method in this manual (Chapter 5) uses “0 ksi” tension stress limit, however for rating purposes follow the design specifications. Rating for shear shall be performed for all rating trucks. Shear capacity shall be based on the MCFT when using the LRFR method, longitudinal reinforcement should be checked for increased tension caused by shear.
13.2.5
Concrete Decks Typically bridge decks will not require rating unless the deck is post-tensioned. Bridge decks with NBI condition of 4 or less may be load rated at the discretion of WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer. When rating of the deck is required, live load shall include all vehicular loads as specified in Section 13.1.5.
13.2.6
Concrete Crossbeams Live loads can be applied to the crossbeam as moving point loads at any location between the curbs for integral crossbeams, or when it is conservative to do so. Otherwise, live loads shall be applied through the girder. For integral crossbeams on prestressed girder bridges, the composite section shall be considered for all loads for the rating. The rating equation does not provide a method for considering staged load conditions.
13.2.7
In-Span Hinges For in-span hinges, rating for shear and bending moment should be performed based on the reduced cross-sections at the hinge seat. Diagonal hairpin bars are part of this rating as they provide primary reinforcement through the shear plane.
13.2.8
Girder Structures Girders shall be rated on a per member basis.
Page 13-12
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
13.2.9
Chapter 13
Box Girder Structures Bridges with spread box girders shall be rated on a per box basis. Otherwise, the rating shall be for the full bridge cross-section for all applied loads. The number of lanes applied to a full section box girder shall be the roadway width divided by the design lane width rounded down to the nearest integer. In cases where sections of the deck are covered with landscaping (lid structures) or the skew between the piers varies by more than 10 degrees along the structure, or the bottom slab width of the box is greater than 60 ft, then the box shall be rated on a per web basis.
13.2.10
Segmental Concrete Bridges Segmental Concrete Bridges shall be rated per the latest MBE.
13.2.11
Concrete Slab Structures Rate cast-in-place (CIP) solid slabs on a per foot of width basis. Rate precast panels on a per panel basis. Rate CIP voided slabs based on a width of slab equal to the predominant center-to-center spacing of voids. When rating flat slabs on concrete piling, assume pin-supports at the slab/pile interface.
13.2.12
Steel Structures Checking of fatigue shall not be part of the rating evaluation. For horizontally curved bridges, flange lateral bending, diaphragms and cross frames shall also be rated. Pin and hanger assemblies shall be rated. Splices of fracture critical members shall be rated.
13.2.13
Steel Floor Systems Floorbeams and stringers shall be rated assuming they are pinned at the supports. Assume the distance from outside face to outside face of end connections as the lengths for the analysis. Live loads shall be applied to the floorbeam as moving point loads at any location between curbs, which produce the maximum effect. Rating of connections is not required unless there is evidence of deterioration.
13.2.14
Steel Truss Structures Typical steel trusses are rated on a per truss basis assuming all truss members have pinned connections. In some special cases, a 3D analysis may be required or fixed connections may be assumed. In general, rate chords, diagonals, verticals, end posts, gusset plates, stringers and floorbeams. For state bridges, gusset plates shall be rated based on WSDOT’s criteria (contact Load Rating Engineer for criteria) otherwise, follow the latest version of the Manual For Bridge Evaluation. Structural pins shall be rated; analyze pins for shear, and the side plates for bearing capacity. Tension members and splices subjected to axial tension shall be investigated for yielding on the gross section and fracture on the net section. For truss members that have been heat-straightened three or more times, deduct 0.1 from the resistance factor.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-13
Chapter 13
13.2.15
Bridge Load Rating
Timber Structures Unless the species and grade is known, assume Douglas fir. Use select structural for members installed prior to 1955 and No. 1 after 1955. The allowable stresses for beams and stringers shall be as listed in the AASHTO Specifications. The nominal dimensions should be used to calculate dead load, and the net dimensions to calculate section modulus. Unless the member is notched or otherwise suspect, shear need not be calculated.
13.2.16
Widened or Rehabilitated Structures For widened bridges, rate crossbeams; assume hinge at the interface between new and existing portions of the X-beam. For existing portion of the widened bridge, a load rating shall be performed if the load carrying capacity of the longitudinal members is altered, or the dead and live loads have increased due to the widening. Longitudinal rating for the widened portion will be required, except in cases where the widened portion has the same capacity of the existing structure or exceeds it. For example, if a slab bridge is widened and the reinforcing in the widened portion matches the existing structure, then no rating will be required. Another example, if a girder bridge is widened using same section as the existing bridge with the same or more reinforcing, and the same or less live and dead loads, then it will not require rating. For rehabilitated bridges, a load rating shall be required if the load carrying capacity of the structure is altered by the rehabilitation.
13.2.17
Buried Structures The distribution of live load thru fill shall be per the corresponding AASHTO Design Specification used for the rating. Use the load rating equation for box culverts and corresponding factors per the latest MBE and interims. For the LRFR Method, HL-93 Load rating, a single lane distribution factor with multiple presence factor shall be used. For Legal, EV and overload trucks a single lane distribution factor shall be used; the multiple presence factor shall be divided out. The live load factor for Legal loads shall be 2.0; for EV and overloads, the live load factors shall be per Table 13.1-1. Buried structures will not require load rating if they meet the following criteria:
• Single span structures where fill depth exceeds clear span.
• Single span structures up to 24 ft. clear span and depth of fill is greater than 13 ft.
• Multiple span structures where depth of fill exceeds the distance between inside faces of end walls. A note shall be included in the letter file for structures that meet the criteria stated above.
Page 13-14
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
13.2.18
Chapter 13
Overloads If the rating factor for either of the permit vehicles is less than 1.0 when rating full longitudinal cross-sections where distribution factors are not used (3D Model), or crossbeams, analyze them with a single overload truck and report the rating factors for both single and multiple lanes on the Load Rating Summary Sheet.
13.2.19
Specialized Hauling Vehicles (SHVs) For State owned structures, WSDOT will make use of the commentary under Section C6A.4.4.2.1b of the ERRATA for Manual Bridge Evaluation, 3rd Edition (MBE-3) in evaluating whether to update load ratings of existing structures to comply with FHWA’s  memo. In addition, WSDOT performed a parametric study to compare the forces on structures exerted by AASHTO Special Hauling Vehicles (SHVs) SU4, SU5, SU6 and SU7 to the three AASHTO legal trucks, Type 3, Type 3S2 and Type 3-3. The study consisted of modeling the SHVs and AASHTO legal trucks running on simple span structures that ranged in length from 10 to 150 feet as well as on two continuous equal spans that ranged in length from 10 to 150 feet each as well. Maximum moments and shears generated by the Legal trucks and SHVs were compared for both models. Results showed that structures with rating factors for the three AASHTO legal trucks greater than 1.50 can safely carry the SHVs. Accordingly, the following criteria will be used to evaluate the need to rate existing structures for SHVs (see also SHVs Load rating Process flow chart):
• Bridges with rating factors for the Type 3, Type 3S2 and Type 3-3 less than or equal to 1.35 will be rated for the AASHTO SHVs.
• Bridges with NBI condition rating for Super or Substructure less than 5 will be rated for AASHTO SHVs.
• Bridges designed for a load lighter than an HS20 will be rated for AASHTO SHVs.
• Bridges that require updating to the load rating due to change in condition, additional dead load or structural modification that will affect capacity of the structure will be rated for AASHTO SHVs.
• Bridges with Operating rating factor for the HS20 > 1.25 are determined to be adequate to carry AASHTO SHV loads.
• Bridges with rating factors for the Type 3, Type 3S2 and Type 3-3 greater than 1.35 for bridges with minimum span length of 80 feet are determined to be adequate to carry AASHTO SHV loads.
• Bridges with rating factors for the Type 3, Type 3S2 and Type 3-3 greater than 1.50 are determined to be adequate to carry AASHTO SHV loads. For structures that meet the above guidelines, WSDOT will create a new stamped summary sheet/letter to be included in the bridge file stating that the ratings are adequate to carry AASHTO SHV loads based on the criteria in this manual.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-15
Chapter 13
Figure 13.2-1
Bridge Load Rating
SHV’s Load Rating Process Flowchart START
Are rating factors for Type 3, Type 3S2 and Type 3-3 <1.35
Yes
No Is Substructure or Superstructure NBI Condition<5
Yes
No Is bridge designed for load lighter than HS20
Yes
No Does the bridge require updating of load rating due to change in condition/ additional Dead load or structural modifications
Yes
No Yes
Are rating factors for Type 3, Type 3S2 and Type 3-3 >1.35 and minimum span length ≥ 80 feet No
Yes
Is HS20 Operating rating factor greater than 1.25 No
Yes
Rating for SHV’s can be deferred until rating are required to be updated due to condition change or structural modifications
Page 13-16
Are rating factors for Type 3, Type 3S2 and Type 3-3 > 1.50
No
Update bridge ratings to include SHV’s
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
13.3
Chapter 13
Load Rating Software For the LRFR Method BridgeLink or Bridg shall be used when rating concrete members and CSIBridge shall be utilized for the analysis of structural steel members. Bridg shall be used for rating steel and concrete structures using the LFR method. Obtain WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer approval for the use of the proper software prior to commencing any work. For more complex structures such as steel curved girders and arches, different software may be used to analyze the loads after obtaining approval from WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer. Acceptable software currently includes CSiBridge. Loads and capacities shall be tabulated in a manner that will make it simple for WSDOT to work with the data in the future. Method of tabulation shall be approved by WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer prior to commencing any work. Microsoft Excel shall be used for tabulation, and all cells in the spreadsheets shall be unlocked, and any hidden code or functions shall be explained thoroughly in the report. Hand calculations shall be provided to verify all spreadsheets. The above requirements apply to State owned structures.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-17
Chapter 13
13.4
Bridge Load Rating
Load Rating Reports Rating reports shall be organized in such a manner that it is easy to follow and all assumptions are clearly stated. For complex large structures, include a table of contents and number the pages in the report. For State owned structures, Load rating reports shall be submitted in an electronic format (pdf). The report shall consist of: 1.
A Bridge Rating Summary sheet, as shown on Appendix 13.5-A1 (LFR) and 13.5-A2 (LRFR) reflecting the lowest rating factor. The summary sheet shall be stamped, signed and dated by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Washington. The electronic stamp and signature shall follow the State of Washington Board of Registration and Land Surveyors guidelines. A single Load rating summary sheet, stamped signed and dated, shall be provided in cases where different sections of a structure were designed and rated by different consultants. The summary sheet shall reflect the lowest rating factors for the different trucks for all sections of the structure.
2.
A brief report of any anomalies in the ratings and an explanation of the cause of any rating factor below 1.00.
3.
Computer output files and any other calculations such as, but not limited to dead loads, distribution factors or any required special analysis.
The electronic submittal shall consist of: 1.
A single pdf file containing the stamped signed and dated summary sheet, table of content as needed, description of any anomalies and all output files and calculations supporting the load rating results.
2.
A complete electronic set of plans for the bridge (applies to new designed bridges), shall be provided as a separate file, pdf format.
3.
One set of electronic files containing the final versions of all input and output files, and other calculations created in performing the load rating that can be opened and utilized in the appropriate program.
Electronic submittals shall be delivered to WSDOT via email, ftp site or USB drive. A minimum of 30 days is required for the Bridge Preservation Office review of any load rating submitted as part of a Design Build Contract. When the load rating calculations are produced as part of a design project (new, widening, or rehabilitation), the load rating report and design calculations shall be bound separately.
Page 13-18
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
13.5
Chapter 13

Controlling Point
RF
Tons (US)
Controlling Point
AASHTO 1 AASHTO 2 AASHTO 3 Legal Lane NRL OL-1 OL-2 EV2 EV3 NBI Rating Inventory (HS-20) Operating (HS-20) Remarks:
13.5-A1
Page 13-20
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Bridge Load Rating
Chapter 13
Appendix 13.5-A2
LRFR Bridge Rating Summary
BRIDGE RATING SUMMARY
PE Stamp
Bridge Name: Bridge Number: SID Number: Span Types: Bridge Length: Design Load: Engineering Firm/Agency: Rated By: Checked By: Date: Inspection Report Date: Rating Method: Overlay Thickness: Truck
Deck Condition Superstructure Condition Substructure Condition RF
γ
Controlling Point
RF
γ
Controlling Point
AASHTO 1 AASHTO 2 AASHTO 3 Legal Lane NRL OL-1 OL-2 EV2 EV3 NBI Rating Inventory (HL-93) Operating (HL-93) Remarks:
13.5-A2
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 13-21
Chapter 13
13.99
Page 13-22
Bridge Load Rating
References 1.
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specification
2.
AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, 17th edition
3.
AASHTO Manual For Bridge Evaluation
4.
WSDOT Bridge Inspection Manual M 36-64
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Chapter 14 Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction 14.1

Page 14-i
Chapter 14
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 14-ii
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Chapter 14 14.1
Introduction
14.1.1
General
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidance for the planning and implementation of projects that may benefit from the application of rapid bridge construction technologies and methods. This chapter was prepared to provide bridge engineers with a basic understanding of different Accelerated Bridge Construction (ABC) methods available, help guide project specific selection of ABC methods, and to encourage the use of the ABC methods described in this chapter, or other innovative approaches to rapid bridge construction. It was also prepared to provide guidance with the design and detailing of precast concrete superstructure and substructure elements for accelerated bridge construction. For the sake of this chapter, ABC and Innovative Bridge Construction are encompassed in the term “ABC.” This chapter is written in accordance with the AASHTO Guide Specifications for LRFD Bridge Seismic Design, 2nd Edition (SEISMIC). It is WSDOT’s application of the Federal Highway Administration’s Every Day Counts. It is intended to compliment the AASHTO LRFD Guide Specifications for Accelerated Bridge Construction, 1st Edition (LRFD-ABCGS). Modern implementations of ABC have been demanded by tight traffic control requirements in urban areas. Bridges used to be constructed on new alignments, connecting communities together in modern ways for the first time where there was no traffic and lower demand to travel from one community to another. Prior to modern times, the advancements made during the Industrial Revolution in new materials and construction techniques sped up construction. We saw bridge construction transform from stone construction used in ancient times, to include steel, concrete, and members subject to much larger forces than in the past. It’s the expressed desire here to apply the benefits of new advancements in materials and construction techniques to a wider array of projects and take the position of minimal time on site as the expectation of every project. The goal of ABC is to deliver projects earlier to the traveling public, reducing the impacts of on-site construction to motorists, promoting traveler and worker safety, and reducing environmental impacts. ABC uses different methods of project delivery and construction to reduce the project schedule, on-site construction time, and public impact. With the ever increasing demand on transportation infrastructure, and the number of bridges that are approaching the end of their service lives, the need for ABC becomes more apparent. ABC should be viewed as a subset of a larger accelerated project delivery effort encompassing all aspects of project development including contract administration through construction contract acceptance. ABC methods are generally safer than conventional construction methods because much of the construction can be done offsite, away from traffic. Quality can also be improved because the construction is often completed in a more controlled environment compared to on-site conditions. Ease of construction and design can be improved as standardized bridge pieces are developed. The use of ABC comes with challenges that need to be overcome on a project-specific basis, often accelerating the schedule increases the cost WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 14-1
Chapter 14
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
of the project. This increased project delivery cost can be offset by reductions in road user costs and economic loss to the affected communities.
14.1.2
ABC Methods Many different methods to facilitate ABC are available. Some of those methods are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. They include the following:
• precast bridge piers
• geosynthetic reinforced abutments with precast slab or deck girder superstructures
• precast decks
• precast footings
• entire precast abutments Installation of these bridge elements can be aided with use of lateral sliding of large bridge members or self-propelled modular transporters, or heavy cranes. Contractually, ABC can be aided with the use of alternate project delivery methods, such as Design-Bid-Build, Design-Build or General Contractor/Construction Manager.
Page 14-2
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.2
Application of ABC
14.2.1
Economics of ABC
Chapter 14
Long construction time allotments may provide for a cheaper bottom line on a project, but they introduce a number of unassigned risks that provide an intangible cost to the contractor, and ultimately to the public. Construction times have significant economic cost to the public through traffic delays and interruption to commerce. It may come as longer traffic jams in already busy urban areas, or as crowded interstates between urban centers, especially on holiday weekends, and subsequent traffic jams on local roads adjacent to the highway. Another cost to consider is that which results from unfamiliar technologies. Until ABC methods are more fully understood by contractors, the estimated costs of the intangible and unfamiliar things will likely be higher than methods common today. This is due to the added risk associated with those unfamiliar construction techniques. With more exposure and familiarity come lower costs as the contractors develop their means and methods.
14.2.2
Practical Applications Locations where time is critical, or access is difficult are where ABC Construction methods would be most fully utilized. Building piers in busy highway medians, installing columns in waters with narrow fish window times, or building bridges on mountain roads far from concrete production facilities are excellent places to consider ABC. ABC Methods may also be fitting for construction over a large body of water, where access is difficult and heavy moving equipment, perhaps on a barge, is easy to bring to the site. Pouring concrete underwater can be difficult, and perhaps installing a precast element in the water may be easier than constructing a coffer dam. Other locations to consider are where the overall footprint of a job site may be a concern. Realize that accessing the connections of precast members can take up a lot of space and may not be necessary. Rebar would come with the precast member instead of being placed before the concrete, eliminating the need for access for workers and equipment near to the ends of the precast member. By moving more duties off site, less space is needed on site, and the offsite location could be at a less sensitive location. If there were concerns with disturbing the adjacent ground, smaller construction sites near a bridge could be beneficial. Bridge designs with many similar pieces, such as long retaining walls, bridge decks, or bridges with many piers are also good candidates for ABC. The smaller pieces can be shipped in on semi-trucks and placed immediately. The repetition would bring more economic value to the ABC component of the project and bring the cost of the precast piece down. Often precast pieces can be used to provide a structural shell that will serve multiple purposes. Precast pieces can be used to form a caisson or a coffer dam that will define a dry work zone which would be filled in with concrete later. The shell could simply provide a void that makes shipping a piece easier, which will get filled with concrete when another bridge portion is poured.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 14-3
Chapter 14
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Construction schedules can make ABC worth considering. Lateral sliding of bridge superstructures have been used such that an existing bridge can remain until the critical moment where one bridge is rolled out, and a new one rolled in. Months of construction can take place next to the location the bridge would be used, and in a matter of hours the new structure could be slid into place. In general, where time on a job site ought to be minimized, ABC would make a good choice to consider.
14.2.3
Prefabricated Bridge Elements and Systems For the sake of bridge design, use of Prefabricated Bridge Elements and Systems (PBES) is one strategy that can meet the objectives of accelerated bridge construction. PBES are structural components of a bridge that are built offsite, or near-site of a bridge, and include features that reduce the onsite construction time and mobility impact time that occur from conventional construction methods. PBES includes innovations in design and high-performance materials and can be combined with the use of project delivery and material procurement methods that invoke faster on-site construction. Because PBES are built off the critical path and under controlled environmental conditions, improvements in safety, quality, and long-term durability can be better achieved. 14.2.3.A
Prefabricated Bridge Elements
Prefabricated bridge elements (PBE) are a single structural component of a bridge built using PBES methods. PBE can be used in combination with other accelerated bridge construction methods. Commonly used WSDOT prefabricated bridge elements are Wide Flange-girders, Deck girders, Tub girders, Slab girders, stay-in-place concrete deck panels, prefabricated pier crossbeams, pier columns, and footings, as well as precast three-sided and four-sided box culverts. For a list and definition of additional specific prefabricated elements refer to section 1.3.2 to 1.3.7 of LRFD-ABCGS. Prefabricated bridge elements are used to reduce the on-site time required for concrete forming, rebar tying and concrete curing, saving weeks to months of construction time. Deck girder elements eliminate conventional onsite deck forming activities. To reduce onsite deck forming operations, deck girder elements are typically placed in an abutting manner. Prefabricated elements are often of higher quality than conventional field-constructed elements, because the concrete is cast and cured in a controlled environment. The elements are often connected using high strength grout, and post-tensioning or pretensioning. Connection strength is an important consideration and close attention shall be given to their design. There are many tools available to provide durable, high strength connections. Their design and details shall follow the guidance given in LRFD-ABCGS section 3.6 Connection Design and Detailing.
Page 14-4
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.2.3.B
Chapter 14
Prefabricated Systems
Prefabricated Systems are a category of PBES that consists of an entire superstructure, an entire substructure, or a total bridge that is procured in a modular manner such that traffic operations can be allowed to resume after placement. Prefabricated systems are rolled, launched, slid, lifted, or otherwise transported into place, having the deck and preferably the barriers in place such that no separate construction phase is required after placement. Due to the manner in which they are installed, prefabricated systems often require innovations in planning, engineering design, high-performance materials, and structural placement methods. Benefits of using prefabricated systems include:
• Minimal utility relocation and right-of-way take, if any at all
• No-to-minimal traffic detouring over an extended period of time
• Preservation of existing roadway alignment
• No use of temporary alignments
• No temporary bridge structures
• No-to-minimal traffic phasing or staging For a list and definition of prefabricated systems refer to section 1.3.8 of LRFD-ABCGS.
14.2.4
Project Delivery Methods At WSDOT, region engineers determine which project delivery method to be employed. Design Manual M 22-01 describes the policy and process for determination of the most appropriate project delivery method.
14.2.5
Decision Making Tools Figures 14.2.6-1 and 14.2.6-2 are tools that may be used for each bridge project, and considered at the Preliminary Plans stage of each project, or sooner. These tools are intended to be used together. It is expected each project will consider ABC to some degree. The questionnaire and flowchart provide some rational measure for how well suited a project may be for ABC. The questionnaire is intended to review the entire project, including items beyond the immediate interests of the bridge, and assign a measure of relevance and priority to each item of concern. This assures that not only is a specific item being considered, but so is its significance to the project. The relevance value should be multiplied by the priority value for each question. The product of each of those numbers shall be added up at the bottom of the questionnaire, and that number will be the ABC Rating. The flow chart is intended to be a situational evaluation regardless of magnitude or relevance of other items. To use the flowchart, the ABC Rating needs to be determined from the questionnaire, and the path one takes through the flowchart is based upon that rating. The outcome of the flow chart will provide the designer with a recommendation to either pursue the ABC approach or to use conventional methods.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 14-5
Chapter 14
Chapter 14
Figure 14.2.6-1
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
ABC Questionnaire
ABC Questionnaire Figure 14.2.6-1
Draft, October 12, 2015 ~ Edited 10-12-15
Page 14-6
Page - 2 -
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Chapter 14
Figure 14.2.6-2
Chapter 14
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
ABC Flow Chart
ABC Flow Chart Figure 14.2.6-2 14.3
Structural Systems
This section explores a few structural systems that an engineer may wish to consider. The systems described here are ones WSDOT has reviewed and developed to a level that is ready for production work. There are other systems available in the referenced documents, and an engineer may wish to develop their own systems and details. These systems may include continuous flight augers, rapid fill systems including expanded polystyrene fill, rapid ground improvement, or other precast structural systems not described below. This section discusses the precast bent system in great detail. WSDOT has worked closely with researchers and is a leader in pursuing its development and considers this chapter an excellent
Draft, October 12,Manual 2015 ~ Edited 10-12-15 WSDOT Bridge Design M 23-50.21 
PagePage
- 3 - 14-7
Chapter 14
14.3
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Structural Systems This section describes a few structural systems that an engineer may wish to consider. These systems are ones WSDOT has reviewed and developed to a level that is ready for production work. This section discusses the precast bent system. WSDOT has worked closely with researchers and industry in the development of the precast bent system for high seismic regions and supports it use in appropriate applications.
14.3.1
Precast Bent System Design for High Seismic Regions This system is often referred to as the Highways for Life (HfL) system, Precast Pier System, or Precast Bent System. It’s configured to be used with precast girder superstructures that are supported on crossbeams that are constructed in two phases. The first or lower-stage crossbeam is constructed, the girders are then set on this beam, and finally the second or upper-stage crossbeam is constructed using cast-in-place concrete to integrate the superstructure and substructure. This precast bent system is an adaptation of a common type of reinforced concrete bent or pier construction used throughout the United States. It utilizes the grouted duct technology developed through university research. Unique features of the precast bent system are a socket connection at the column-tofoundation connection and a grouted-duct arrangement at the column-to-crossbeam connection. This system utilizes precast columns and precast lower-stage crossbeams. The system also can include splices in the column to facilitate weight control for the columns, whereby splitting the column into multiple segments. This can control the weight of precast elements that must be transported. Similarly the precast crossbeam can be split into segments for the same reason. Both of these splice connections are configured to be capacity protected for seismic forces. The lower column socket connection has also been configured to be used with spread footings, pile caps and drilled shafts. Design criteria for these connections shall follow the LRFD-ABCGS specific guidelines in Section 3.6. A demonstration project was constructed using this technology on a bridge in Washington State over Interstate 5, Bridge Number 12/118. The details of the design for this project are included in the paper “Accelerated Bridge Construction in Washington State: From Research to Practice” in the Fall 2012 PCI Journal, and so are construction photos and a lessons-learned section relating the contractor’s feedback following construction. The development and deployment of this technology has been a success, and the owner, the Washington State Department of Transportation, continues to look for opportunities to apply the technology, along with other methods, to accelerate bridge construction in the state.
Page 14-8
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Precast Bent Systems for High Seismic Regions Appendix B, Publication Number FHWA-HIF-031-037-B.
• Precast BentConstruction Systems for High Seismic Regions Appendix C, Publication Number Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Chapter 14 FHWA-HIF-031-037-C. 14.3.1.A Description of System
•
14.3.1.1 – Description of System of precast columns supported by either spread footings or The bent system is comprised drilled shafts and a precast crossbeam that supports pre-stressed concrete girders. The The bent system is comprised of precast columns supported by either spread footings or drilled bent is integrated with the superstructure using a cast-in-place concrete diaphragm. The shafts and a precast crossbeam that supports pre-stressed concrete girders. The bent is crossbeam thus created is a two-stage dropped crossbeam with the lower precast portion integrated with the superstructure using a cast-in-place full concrete diaphragm. The crossbeam known as the first stage crossbeam and the upper diaphragm known as the second stage thusofcreated is a two-stage dropped the of lower precastand portion known as the first the crossbeam. The bridge deckcrossbeam slab is castwith on top the girders diaphragm. This stage crossbeam and the upper diaphragm known as the second stage of the crossbeam. The concept is illustrated in Figure 14.3.1.1-1. bridge deck slab is cast on top of the girders and diaphragm. This concept is illustrated in The system consists of a socket connection at the foundation level and a grouted bar Figures 14.3.1.1-1, 14.3.1.1-2 and 14.3.1.1-3. connection to the crossbeam. The foundation must be cast around the precast column Thetosystem consists a socket connection at the foundation level and a and grouted bar form the socketofconnection, and the interface between the column foundation connection the crossbeam. The foundation beload castcarrying around the precast form must beto intentionally roughened to ensure must vertical capacity. In column the HfL to Bent the connection crossbeam is intended to consist of large diameter bars the System, socket connection, and to thethe interface between the column and foundation must be such thatroughened fewer bars to areensure required. These bars are grouted into In steel with System, generousthe intentionally vertical load carrying capacity. theducts HfL Bent diameters to the bars, 2 to 3 inches larger diameter, to facilitate fit that up as shown connection to relative the crossbeam is intended to consist ofinlarge diameter bars such fewer bars Figure 14.3.1.1-1. are in required. These bars are grouted into steel ducts with generous diameters relative to the bars, 2 many to 3 inches in diameter, to facilitate fit up as shown in FigureHowever, 14.3.1.1-1. For typicallarger bridges a single precast column element is sufficient. the column concept wasprecast included in theelement validation HfL demonstration For segmental many typical bridges a single column is and sufficient. However, theproject. segmental column concept was included in the validation and HfL demonstration project. Figure 14.3.1.1-1 Precast Bent System, Exploded View
Draft, October 12, 2015 ~ Edited 10-12-15
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page - 5 -
Page 14-9
Chapter 14
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.3.1.B
Design Philosophy
This process emulates cast-in-place connections with precast elements. CIP construction joints are typically detailed with dowels and lap splices. Emulation design replaces the traditional lap splice with a grouted duct sleeve. The design of column connections is especially difficult for high seismic zones. Confinement of column reinforcing is possible with precast concrete elements. The AASHTO design specifications do not mandate the confinement reinforcing bars be continuous from the column into the adjacent members footing or crossbeam. The confinement reinforcing can be terminated in the column and separate confinement reinforcement can be added to the adjacent element. 14.3.1.C
Design Provisions
Design of precast bent systems shall meet the criteria specified in Section 3.4 of AASHTO LRFD-ABCGS. The seismic analysis and design method shall be displacement-based design per Section 3.4.1.3 of AASHTO LRFD-ABCGS. Interior joints of multi-column bents shall be considered “T” joints for joint shear analysis. Exterior joints shall be considered knee joints and require special analysis and detailing that are not addressed herein, unless special analysis determines that “T” joint analysis is appropriate for an exterior joint based on the actual bent configuration. Criteria to establish appropriate design and detailing provisions for exterior joints shall be approved by the Bridge Design Engineer. 14.3.1.C.1
Socket-Type Footing Connections
Where socket-type connections are used to connect precast columns to CIP spread footings or pile caps, the following requirements shall be followed. The interface of the precast column with the footing shall be intentionally roughened to a minimum amplitude of 0.70 in. The column-to-footing shear interface shall be designed for interface shear using Section 5.7.4 of AASHTO LRFD-BDS. To account for potential shrinkage cracking around the column, the cohesion factor, c, shall be taken as zero. The friction factor, µ, and the factors, K1 and K2 may be taken as those for normal weight concrete placed against a clean concrete surface. 14.3.1.C.2
Drilled Shaft
Where socket-type connections are used to connect precast columns to drilled shafts the column-to-shaft side interface shall be intentionally roughened to a minimum amplitude of 0.70 in. 14.3.1.C.3
Precast Column
Precast columns and crossbeams that are used with the HfL bent system are covered by Section 8 of AASHTO LRFD-SGS. The columns of such systems are not considered precast concrete piles. A.Interface Shear Transfer Capacity of Precast Bent Systems The interface shear capacity between precast column and crossbeam or between segments of precast columns shall be determined using Section 5.7.4 of AASHTO LRFDBDS. To account for cyclic loading effects and the potential for significant cracking, the cohesion factor, c, shall be taken as zero and the friction factor, µ, shall be 0.60. The factors, K1 and K2 shall be 0.2 and 0.8 ksi, respectively. Page 14-10
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.3.1.D
Chapter 14
Geometry and General Requirements
The following geometric requirements shall apply to precast bent systems without requiring approval of the WSDOT Bridge Design Engineer:
• Columns shall be located under crossbeams.
• Grouted ducts shall have their centerlines oriented plumb.
• Footings abutting precast columns shall be poured around the end of the column.
• Grouted duct connections are not allowed in footings.
• Precast columns shall not be connected to precast footings.
• Crossbeam splices shall be located at points of contraflexure in the crossbeam and not within Beff of the column, as defined in Section 3.6.12 of AASHTO LRFD-ABCGS..
• Column splices shall incorporate grouted ducts on at least one abutting end of a column within a joint. Rebar that is expected to protrude into a duct shall be cast with the rest of the column segment.
• Concrete segments may be constructed on site or at a precast manufacturing facility.
• WSDOT's Standard Specifications M 41-10 shall apply.
14.3.2
Geosynthetic Reinforced Soil Integrated Bridge System The Geosynthetic Reinforced Soil Integrated Bridge System (GRS-IBS) described in AASHTO LRFD-ABCGS may be used but shall follow the design criteria given in BDM Section 7.5.2. Proprietary SE walls supporting abutments shall not be considered preapproved, and shall not be used beyond the limits described herein unless approved by the WSDOT State Geotechnical Engineer and the WSDOT Bridge Design Engineer.
14.3.3
Precast Decks Full-depth precast deck panels and connections shall follow the requirements In LRFDABCGS Section 3.6.8
14.3.4
Link Slabs Link slabs as defined in LRFD-ABCGS 1.3.7 shall not be used.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 14-11
Chapter 14
14.4
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Innovative Bridge Construction Innovative Bridge Construction is simply an idea that encourages outside the box thinking encouraging engineers to consider principles that will enhance bridge performance, speed up construction, or add any other benefit to the industry. There is no single or handful of ideas that can contain or describe Innovative Bridge Construction. It’s simply a mentality that new ideas ought to be explored. Innovation might be defined as any contribution to the bridge industry that takes bridge construction past the current standard practice of bridge construction. Some items produced recently are described in the following sections.
14.4.1
Self-Centering Columns
Chapter 14 columns are Accelerated andtoInnovative Bridge Construction Self-centering columns designed restore much of their original shape
after a seismic event. They’re intended to improve the serviceability of a bridge after an earthquake. Self-centering columns are columns designed restore much of their original shape after a seismic event. They’re intended to improvewith the aserviceability of a bridge an earthquake. Self-centering columns are constructed precast concrete columnafter segment with
a duct running through longitudinally. rest onconcrete footingscolumn with post-tensioning (PT) Self-centering columns areitconstructed withThey a precast segment with a duct strand developed into them. Once the precast column piece is set on the footing, the running through it longitudinally. They rest on footings with post-tensioning (PT) strand PT strand threads through the duct and gets anchored into the crossbeam above the developed into them. Once the precast column piece is set on the footing, the PT strand column. The PT strand is unbonded to the column segment. As a column experiences a threads through the duct and gets anchored into the crossbeam above the column. The PT lateral load, the PT strand elastically stretches to absorb the seismic energy and returns strand is unbonded to the column segment. As a column experiences a lateral load, the PT to its original tension load after the seismic event. The expectation is the column would strand elastically stretches to absorb the seismic energy and returns to its original tension load rotate as a rigid body and the PT strand would almost spring the column back to its after the seismic event. The expectation is the column would rotate as a rigid body and the PT original orientation. strand would almost spring the column back to its original orientation. A depiction of the self-centering concept is shown in Figure 14.4.1-1. A depiction of the self-centering concept is shown in Figure 14.4.1-1. Figure 14.4.1-1
Self-Centering Column Concept
Figure 14.4.1-1 – Self-Centering Column Concept 14.4.2 Shape Memory Alloy Like self-centering columns, Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) and Engineered Cementitious Composite (ECC) products are introduced into bridge design as a means to improve ductility, seismic resilience, and serviceability of a bridge after an earthquake. SMA is a class of alloys that are manufactured from either a combination of nickel and titanium or copper, magnesium and aluminum. The alloy is shaped into round bars in sizes similar to conventional steel reinforcement. When stressed, the SMA can undergo large deformations and byBridge eitherDesign the application heat Page 14-12 return to original shape. This deformation can be recovered WSDOT Manual Mof 23-50.21  (Shape Memory Effect) or removal of stress (Superelastic or Pseudoelastic effect) (Langoudas 2008 and Hodgson 1990). Figure 14.4.2-1 shows the stress-strain profile for loading and
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.4.2
Chapter 14
Shape Memory Alloy Like self-centering columns, Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) and Engineered Cementitious Composite (ECC) products are introduced into bridge design as a means to improve ductility, seismic resilience, and serviceability of a bridge after an earthquake. SMA is a class of alloys that are manufactured from either a combination of nickel and titanium or copper, magnesium and aluminum. The alloy is shaped into round bars in sizes similar to conventional steel reinforcement. When stressed, the SMA can undergo large deformations and return to original shape. This deformation can be recovered by either the application of heat (Shape Memory Effect) or removal of stress (Superelastic or Pseudoelastic effect) (Lagoudas 2008 and Hodgson 1990). Figure 14.4.2-1 shows the stress-strain profile for loading and unloading of SMA. The SR 99 Alaskan Way Viaduct Replacement – South Access project demonstrated that yield strengths of 55 ksi can be achieved with an initial modulus of elasticity of approximately 5400 ksi. Under service and strength limit states the SMA in the column is designed similarly to traditional mild reinforcement, the stress in the bar is limited to the yield strength. During a seismic event, when the yield stress is exceeded, the bars deform trilinearly and restore to the undeformed dissipates. and Innovative Bridge Construction Chapter state 14 as the stress Accelerated Figure 14.4.2-1
Shape Memory Alloy Stress-Strain Model
ECC is in the family of High Performance Fiber Reinforced Cementitious Composites and is similar to traditional concrete mixes, except that the mixModel includes a polyvinyl Shape Memory Alloy Stress-Strain alcohol fiber and omits the course aggregate. ECC replaces conventional concrete in Figure 14.4.2-1 columns to provide a moderate tensile strength and increase ductility to accommodate is deformations in the family ofof High Fiber Reinforced Cementitious Composites theECC large thePerformance SMA. The use of ECC eliminates the spalling expectedand of is similar to traditional concrete mixes, except that the mix includes a polyvinyl alcohol fiber and conventional concretes in the hinge region. Figure 14.4.2-2 shows the stress-strain profile omits the course aggregate. ECC replaces conventional in columnsconcrete to provide a comparison of confined and unconfined ECC (f`c = 5 ksi)concrete and conventional moderate tensile strength and increase ductility to accommodate the large deformations of the (f`c = 4 ksi)(Li 2007 and Xu 2010). SMA. The use of ECC eliminates the spalling expected of conventional concretes in the hinge region. Figure 14.4.2-2 shows the stress-strain profile comparison of confined and unconfined ECC (f`c = 5 ksi) and conventional concrete (f`c = 4 ksi)(Li 2007 and Xu 2010). 

Engineered EngineeredCementitious CementitiousConcrete ConcreteStress-Strain Stress-StrainModel Model When14 combined in theAccelerated plastic hinge zones of Innovative bridge columns,Bridge the SMAConstruction and ECC materials Chapter and Engineered Engineered Cementitious Cementitious Concrete Concrete Stress-Strain Stress-Strain Model Model Figure 14.4.2-2 are designed to provide high levels of strain with a super-elastic performance to allow large deflections withhinge negligible permanent deformation minimal damage. This are Whenfor combined in the plastic zones of bridge columns, theand SMA and ECC materials Figure 14.4.2-2 Draft, Draft, October October 12, 12, 2015 2015 ~ ~ Edited Edited 10-12-15 10-12-15 Page 39 combination ofhigh materials a bridge performance column needstotoallow perform wellPage in a 39 designed to provide levelsprovides of strainthe withductility a super-elastic for large event while providing elasticity to minimal restorethe the bridge closer tomaterials its original Whenseismic combined in the plastic hingeenough zones of bridge columns, SMA and ECC are deflections with negligible permanent deformation and damage. This combination of Draft, Draft,October October 12, 12,2015 2015~~Edited Edited10-12-15 10-12-15 Page Page 39 39 shape conventional eventowith proper detailing (Cruz for 2012). designed to than provide high levelsconcrete strainand withrebar, a super-elastic performance allow large materials provides the ductility aofbridge column needs perform well in a to seismic event while deflections with negligible permanent deformation and minimal damage. This combination of providing elasticity to restore the bridge to its original shape than conventional Barsenough fabricated with SMA are coupled with closer conventional steel reinforcing located outside materials provides the ductility a bridge column needs to perform well in a seismic event while concrete rebar, even withtoproper (Cruzof2012). the and plastic hinge region reducedetailing the amount SMA used in the bridge column. The providing enough elasticity to restore the bridge closer to its original shape than conventional engineered cementitious material can be poured within the plastic hinge region separately Bars fabricated with SMA are coupled with conventional steel reinforcing located outside the concrete with proper detailing (Cruz 2012). fromand therebar, rest ofeven the column concrete. plastic hinge region to reduce the amount of SMA used in the bridge column. The engineered Bars fabricated with are coupled with steelregion located outside theof An example of aSMA column with ECC andconventional SMA reinforcing inreinforcing the plastic hingefrom regions cementitious material can be poured within the plastic hinge separately the rest plastic hinge region to reduce the amount of SMA used in the bridge column. The engineered is shown in Figure 14.4.2-3. the column concrete. cementitious material can be poured within the plastic hinge region separately from the rest of An of a column with ECCMemory and SMA reinforcing in the plastic hinge regions is shown in the example column Figureconcrete. 14.4.2-3 Shape Alloy and Engineered Cementitious Column Figure 14.4.2-3. (Elevation and Sections) An example of a column with ECC and SMA reinforcing in the plastic hinge regions is shown in Figure 14.4.2-3.
Shape Memory Alloy and Engineered Cementitious Column (Elevation and Sections) Figure 14.4.2-3 Column (Elevation and Sections) Shape Memory Alloy and Engineered Cementitious Page 14-14
14.5
Figure 14.4.2-3 WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21  Shipping, Handling and Erection
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.5
Shipping, Handling and Erection
14.5.1
Lifting Devices
Chapter 14
Lifting locations for precast elements shall be shown in the design plans. The engineer is responsible for checking the handling stresses in the element for the lifting locations Chapter 14 Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction shown on the plans. Elements shall be designed using the following general criteria: For stripping from the form, use two point picks for columns and pier crossbeams, similar For stripping from the form, use two point picks for columns and pier crossbeams, similar to to prestressed beams. Columns will require additional pick points for tipping into the prestressed beams. Columns will require additional pick points for tripping into the vertical vertical orientation during erection. Wall panels generally require four or more pick points orientation during erection. Wall panels generally require four or more pick points when lifting when lifting horizontal and additional pick points for tipping into the vertical orientation horizontal and additional pick points for tipping into the vertical orientation during erection. during erection.
14.5.2 14.5.2
• •Use on the the static static tensile tensile stress stressininthe theconcrete concreteduring during 0.16 f c′ on Usean anallowable allowable stress stress of of 0.16 handling. This is typical percent against handling. typical in the industry and provides provides aa 50 50% bufferbuffer against exceeding the exceeding the modulus of rupture during handling. modulus of rupture during handling.
• •Do Donot notshow showspecific specificlifting liftinghardware hardwareon onthe thedrawings. drawings.Verify Verifythat thatatatleast leastone onelifting lifting hardware manufacturer can provide a device that can hardware manufacturer can provide a device that can resist the anticipated loads. hardware manufacturer can provide a device that can resist the anticipated loads. Considerreducing reducingthe thesize size of of the the element element or or switch switch to toaaa more more sophisticated sophisticated lifting lifting Consider Consider reducing the size of the element or switch to more sophisticated lifting system if no manufacturer can meet the required resistance. with fabricators system if no manufacturer can meet the required resistance. Consult with fabricators system if no manufacturer can meet the required resistance. Consult with fabricators for for these situations. these situations. for these situations. The contractor choose alternate locations approval the engineer. The contractor may may choose alternate liftinglifting locations with with approval fromfrom the engineer. The The contractor mayprovide choose the alternate lifting locations with approval from the engineer. The contractor will spacing and location of the lifting devices andplan submit contractor will provide the spacing and location of the lifting devices and submit and plan The contractor will provide the spacing and location the lifting devices and submit plan and handling stress calculations for approval prior to of construction of the element. handling stress calculations for approval prior to construction of the element. and handling stress calculations for approval prior to construction of the element. Unless buried in a subsequent cast-in-place concrete pour, lifting devices shall be recessed a Unless buried in a subsequent cast-in-place concrete pour, lifting devices shall be recessed a minimum of 1” below the exposed surface of the precast element. Recesses minimum of 1” below the exposed surface of the precast element. Recesses at the lifting Unless buried in a subsequent cast-in-place concrete pour, lifting devices shall be at the lifting devices shall a roughened finish. Some recesses formed and cannot devices shall have a roughened finish. recesses are andare cannot beRecesses broomed recessed a minimum of 1” have below theSome exposed surface offormed the precast element. be broomed during finishing. In those cases a surface retarder can be used to provide a during finishing. In those cases a surface retarder can be used to provide a roughened surface. at the lifting devices shall have a roughened finish. Some recesses are formed and cannot roughened surface. After thefinal element is placed in its final position, the lifting Afterbe thebroomed element is placed in its position, The lifting device shall removed to the shall base during finishing. In those cases a surface retarder canbe be used to device provide a of be removed to the base of the recess and the recess shall be filled with structural nonthe recess and the recess shall beelement filled with structural non-shrink groutthe or other roughened surface. After the is placed in its final position, liftingapproved device shall shrink grout orInother approved patching material. In asome cases the recess may be on grout a patching material. some cases the recess may be on vertical surface and non-shrink be removed to the base of the recess and the recess shall be filled with structural nonvertical surface and non-shrink grout may not be feasible. may shrink not be grout feasible. or other approved patching material. In some cases the recess may be on a vertical surface andand non-shrink grout may not be feasible. Handling, Storage Shipping 14.5.2 Handling and Storage The contractor is responsible for the handling, storage and shipping of precast elements Handling, Storage and Shipping The contractor is responsible for the handling andstress storage of precast elements in such a manner in such a manner that does not cause undue on the element. The contract that does not cause undue stress on the element. The contractor shall submit a handling and The contractorshall is responsible the handling, storage and shipping of precast elements specifications require thefor contractor to submit a handling, storage and shipping plan storage plan the engineer forprior review prior to the construction of any element. in atomanner that does not cause undue stress on The contract to such the engineer for review to the construction of the any element. element. specifications shall require the contractor to submit a handling, storage and shipping plan The engineer will inspect all elements and reject any elements with defects that are not to the engineer forThe review prior elements to the construction of any at element. considered repairable. rejected will be replaced the contractor’s expense. The contractor is responsible for any schedule delays due to rejected elements. 14.5.3 Tolerances The tolerance of casting elements is critical to a successful installation. One of the most important tolerances is the location of the grouted duct splices. Make the dimension measurements from a common working point or line in order to specify tolerances of critical elements. Templates shall be used where practical. Center to center measurements can lead to a build-up of tolerance errors.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.20 Page 14-15 September The 2020 typical detail drawings shall include details of maximum allowable tolerances. Include these WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 Page 14-15  details in all precast substructure projects.
Chapter 14
14.5.3
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Tolerances The tolerance of casting elements is critical to a successful installation. One of the most important tolerances is the location of the grouted duct splices. Make the dimension measurements from a common working point or line in order to specify tolerances of critical elements. Templates shall be used where practical. Center to center measurements can lead to a build-up of tolerance errors. The typical detail drawings shall include details of maximum allowable tolerances. Include these details in all precast substructure projects. Include a requirement in the project specifications that templates shall be used. Details of the templates shall be shown in the shop drawings. Note that erection tolerances are also extremely important, especially with placement of the crossbeam on multiple columns prior to installation of the elements at the bridge site. This is especially true for grouted splice couplers. Verify the spacing of the couplers as well as their orientation within the element. The splice reinforcement is often left longer than required in the fabrication yard so that the bars can be cut the exact length in the field as the construction progresses. The dry fit can still be done in this case with the longer bars.
14.5.4
Assembly Plans Most bridge construction projects require contractors to submit erection plans for bridge girders. Prefabricated substructures require an even higher level of pre-construction planning. The contract specifications shall include requirements that the contractor submit an assembly plan for the construction of the entire structure including the precast substructure. Include as a minimum the following in the assembly plan:
• size and weights of all elements
• minimum curing time of elements before shipping to the site
• picking points of all elements
• sequence of erection
• temporary shoring and bracing
• grouting procedures
• location and types of cranes
• a detailed timeline for the construction including time for curing grouts and closure pours
14.5.5
Element Sizes The size of precast concrete substructure elements can become an issue for elements that need to be shipped long distances. For precast elements requiring shipping, use the following general guidelines for sizing precast concrete substructure elements:
• Width Keep the width, short dimension, of the element and any projecting reinforcing below 14 feet. This is to keep the widths reasonable for shipping.
• Height Keep the maximum height of any element including any projecting reinforcing less than 10 feet so the element can be transported below existing bridges.
Page 14-16
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Chapter 14
• Length Length ought to be considered to ensure the load can be distributed well with conventional shipping equipment.
• Weight Keep the maximum weight of each element to less than 100,000 pounds in order to keep the size of site cranes reasonable. The above limits can be increased for some projects, particularly where precast elements are not required to be shipped to the site. The designer can work with both the fabricator and contractor to size the elements based on the available equipment and the proposed shipping routes. For large pieces, weight can be managed to make the precast pieces more workable. Weight can be minimized with lightweight concrete, voids, or smaller pieces with more joints.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 14-17
Chapter 14
14.6
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Installation Method Options Installation methods should be determined by the contractor. Designers shall include a suggested construction sequence as part of the contract plans. Considering means of installation is important for any engineering task one pursues. But it is especially important for ABC since so much of the cost will be driven by the constructability of the project. There are a multitude of installation methods available for the construction of ABC projects. Besides the standard method of lifting and placing precast elements with mobile cranes, construction could be achieved by pivoting, launching, lateral sliding, lifting from overhead with gantry cranes, or even lifting from underneath with self-propelled modular transporters. General information for placement by cranes is similar to that given for prestressed girders in Sections 2.3.4, and 2.6.2 of the BDM, with the exception of limiting sizes and weight which should follow Section 14.5. Lateral sliding and self-propelled modular transporters have both been used on significant WSDOT projects.
14.6.1
Lateral Slide Systems Bridge placement using lateral sliding is a type of ABC where the entire superstructure is constructed in a temporary location and is moved into place over a night or weekend. This method is typically used for bridge replacement of a primary roadway where the new superstructure is constructed on temporary supports adjacent and parallel to the bridge being replaced. Once the superstructure is fully constructed, the existing bridge structure is demolished, and the new bridge is moved transversely into place. Lateral sliding can be used for switching out a new and old superstructure. It may also be used for moving an existing bridge to a new alignment, in effort to make room to build a new bridge at the original alignment. Refer to AASHTO LRFD-ABCGS section 1.6 for design requirements and general information concerning the use of Lateral Slide Systems.
14.6.2
Self-Propelled Modular Transporter Systems Self-Propelled Modular Transporters (SPMT) are remote-controlled, self-leveling, multiaxle platform vehicles capable of transporting several thousand tons of weight. SPMTs have the ability to move laterally, rotate 360° with carousel steering, and typically have a jack stroke of 18 to 24 inches. They have traditionally been used to move heavy equipment that is too large for standard trucks to carry. Refer to AASHTO LRFD-ABCGS for design requirements and general information concerning the use of SPMTs.
Page 14-18
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.7
Chapter 14
Examples of Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction A document with examples of WSDOT projects where ABC has been utilized is on the Bridge and Structures’ ABC website. This document includes a brief description of the benefits and reasons for using ABC in the project and the lessons learned. Below is a list of the types of construction and the projects that used each type. Lateral Sliding
I-5, Skagit River Bridge – Bridge No. 5/712 Mount Vernon and Burlington, Washington SR 104, Hood Canal Bridge–Bridge Number 104/4 and 104/5 East and West Approaches–Port Gamble, Washington SR 167, Puyallup River Bridge–Bridge Number 167/20E Puyallup, Washington
Precast Deck
I-5, 38th Street–Bridge Number 5/430 Tacoma, Washington SR 104, Hood Canal Bridge–Bridge Number 104/5 East Half Partial Deck Panel–Port Gamble, Washington
Precast Crossbeam SR 16, Eastbound Nalley Valley–Bridge Number 16/6W-N Tacoma, Washington SR 520/SR 202 Interchange–Bridge Number 520/46 Redmond, Washington I-5, Highways for Life Demonstration Project–Bridge Number 12/118 Grand Mound, Washington SR 520, Floating Bridge & Landings – Bridge Number 520/7.5 Seattle, Washington Precast Column SR 520, 36th Street Bridge–Bridge Number 520/36.5 Redmond, Washington I-405, NE 8th Street Ramp–Bridge Number 405/43 Bellevue, Washington SR 16, Cedar Street and Union Avenue Bridges Bridge Numbers 16/12E, 16/12W, 16/14E, and 16/14W Tacoma, Washington Adjacent Deck Bulb Tee Beams I-5, Skagit River Bridge–Bridge Number 5/712 Mount Vernon and Burlington, Washington I-90, Easton Avenue Bridge – Bridge Number 90/121 Easton, Washington
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 14-19
Chapter 14
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
Self-Propelled Modular Transporter SR 104, Hood Canal Bridge–Bridge Number 104/4 and 104/5 East and West Approaches–Port Gamble, Washington SR 433, Lewis & Clark Bridge – Bridge 433/1 Longview, Washington–Rainier, Oregon Other Precast Elements SR 303, Manette Bridge–Bridge Number 303/4A Bremerton, Washington
Page 14-20
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Accelerated and Innovative Bridge Construction
14.99
Chapter 14
References Bijan Khaleghi, Eric Schultz. Stephen Seguirant, Lee Marsh, Olafur Haraldsson, Marc Eberhard. and John Stanton, Accelerated bridge construction in Washington State: From research to practice, Fall 2012-PCI Journal, P 34-49 Lagoudas, D.C. 2008, Shape Memory Alloys: Modeling and Engineering Applications. New York, NY: Springer Science and Business Media, LLC. Hodgson DE, Wu MH, Biermann RJ. 1990, Shape Memory Alloys. ASM Handbook: ASM International. 897-902. Li, Victor C., 2007, Engineered Cementitious Composites (ECC) – Material, Structural, and Durability Performance. In Nawy, E. (ed), Concrete Construction Engineering Handbook, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Chapter 24. Xu, Shi-Lang and Xiang-Rong Cai, 2010, Experimental Study and Theoretical Models on Compressive Properties of Ultrahigh Toughness Cruz, C., and M. Saiidi, 2012, Shake Table Studies of a 4-Span Bridge Model with Advanced Materials. Journal of Structural Engineering, ASCE, Vol. 138, No. 2, pp. 183-192.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 

15.1.1
Purpose This chapter provides the contractual requirements for structural design of WSDOT projects that supersede AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications (LRFD) and AASHTO Guide Specifications for LRFD Seismic Bridge Design (SEISMIC).
15.1.2
Specifications This manual and the following AASHTO Specifications are the foundation design criteria and design practice documents used to design highway bridges and structures in Washington State:
• AASHTO LRFD
• AASHTO SEISMIC
• WSDOT Standard Plans M 21-01 – A-50 Series Standard Plans for Embankment Geometry at Bridge Ends
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-1
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.2
Bridge Configuration Criteria
15.2.1
General 15.2.1.A
Structure Conceptual Plan
The Structure Conceptual Plan is part of the Design-Build project Request For Proposal (RFP) Appendix M. The purpose of the Structure Conceptual Plan is to present a baseline structural concept where bridges or buried structures are assumed by those preparing the RFP to be appropriate based on the criteria and requirements specified in the RFP. The Structure Conceptual Plan is developed to be consistent with the overall baseline civil roadway concept of the RFP Appendix M. The content of the Structure Conceptual Plan includes the items listed in the Conceptual Plan Checklist of Appendix 15.2-A1. 15.2.1.B
Bridge Redundancy
Bridge substructure shall have the following minimum number of columns to be considered to provide conventional levels of redundancy in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specification Section 1.3.4:
• One column minimum for roadway widths 40′ wide and under.
• Two columns minimum for roadway widths over 40′ to 60′.
• Three columns minimum for roadway widths over 60′. Bridge superstructure shall have the following minimum number of webs to be considered to provide conventional levels of redundancy in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specification Section 1.3.4:
• Three webs minimum for roadway widths 32′ and under.
• Four webs minimum for roadway widths over 32′. See Bridge Standard Drawing 2.3A2-1 for details. 15.2.1.C
Bridge Deck Drainage
Roadway and bridge deck profiles shall be adjusted as much as possible to avoid having bridge drains on the bridge. If bridge geometry is such that drains are required, the number of drains should be minimized as much as possible while still providing a bridge deck drainage design that meets required standards. The bridge drain assembly and system shall be designed for low maintenance.
15.2.2
Railroad Crossings 15.2.2.A
Horizontal Clearances
For railroad overcrossings, minimum horizontal clearances are as noted below: Fill Section Cut Section
Railroad Alone 14′ 16′
Horizontal clearance shall be measured from the center of the outside track to the face of pier. When the track is on a curve, the minimum horizontal clearance shall be increased at the rate of 1½″ for each degree of curvature. An additional 8′ of clearance for off-track equipment shall only be provided when specifically requested by the railroad.
Page 15-2
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.2.2.B
Chapter 15
Crash Walls
Crash walls, when required, shall be designed to conform to the criteria of the AREMA Manual. To determine when crash walls are required, consult the following:
• Union Pacific Railroad, “Guidelines for Design of Highway Separation Structures over Railroad (Overhead Grade Separation)”
• AREMA Manual
• WSDOT Railroad Liaison Engineer
• The Railroad 15.2.2.C
Substructure
For highway over railway grade separations, the top of footings for bridge piers or retaining walls adjacent to railroad tracks shall be 2′ or more below the elevation of the top of tie and shall not have less than 2′ of cover from the finished ground. The footing face shall not be closer than 10′ to the center of the track.
15.2.3
Temporary Bridges Temporary bridges shall be designed to meet the requirement of BDM Section 10.13 and other BDM Sections as applicable.
15.2.4
Inspection and Maintenance Access 15.2.4.A
General
Bridges shall be configured to allow inspectors direct access to bearings, and access to within 3-feet of superstructure surfaces. See also Figure 2.3.11-1 for under-bridgeinspection-truck clearance requirements. 15.2.4.B
Bearings
Adequate clearance for maintenance and inspection of bearings shall be provided. The clearance shall be adequate to inspect, remove and replace the bearings. Jacking points shall be provided for bearing replacement. Jacking points shall be designed to support 200 percent of the calculated lifting load. 15.2.4.C
Safety Cables, Handrails, and Anchors
Built-up plate girder bridges with girders 5-feet deep or greater in depth shall be detailed with safety handrails for inspectors walking the bottom flanges. At large gusset plate locations on truss bridges (3-feet wide or wider), cables or lanyard anchors shall be placed on the inside face of the truss so inspectors can utilize bottom lateral gusset plates to stand on while traversing around the main truss gusset plates. 15.2.4.D
Abutment Slopes
Slopes in front of abutments shall provide enough overhead clearance to the bottom of the superstructure to access bearings for inspection and possible replacement (3-feet minimum for girder type bridges and 5-feet minimum for concrete slabs).
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-3
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.2.4.E 1.
Access and Lighting Concrete Box and Prestressed Concrete TubGirders See Section 5.2.6 for design criteria.
2.
Composite Steel Box Girders See Section 6.4.9 for design criteria.
3.
Access Doors, Lighting, Receptacles and Penetrations All Access doors shall have a minimum 2′-6″ diameter or 2′-6″ square clear opening. Lock box latches shall be installed on all access doors accessible from ground level. Access hatches shall swing into the box girders and shall be placed at locations that do not impact traffic. Lighting and receptacle requirements shall be in accordance with WSDOT Design Manual Chapter 1040. Air vents shall be in accordance with Figures 5.2.6-1 and 5.2.6-2. Box girder penetrations (vents and drain holes) greater than one inch in diameter through the exterior shall be covered with galvanized wire mesh screen to prevent vermin and birds from accessing the interior of the box girder. The wires shall have a maximum spacing of ¼ inch in both directions.
15.2.5
Bridge Types Bridges shall conform to the following superstructure depth-to-span ratios based on past WSDOT experience, superseding AASHTO LRFD Section 2.5 2.6.3. The optional live load deflection limits of AASHTO LRFD Sections 3.6.1.3.2 and 2.5.2.6.2 shall be satisfied. For both simple and continuous spans, the span length is the horizontal distance between centerlines of bearings. Refer to Section 2.2.4 for superstructure depth requirements for inspection and maintenance access. For the required minimum depth to span ratios see Section 2.4.1. WSDOT restricts the use of cast-in-place reinforced concrete Tee-Beam girder for bridge superstructure. This type of superstructure may only be used for bridges with tight curvatures or irregular geometry upon Bridge Design Engineer approval. WSDOT restricts the use of timber girders for bridge superstructures to non-vehicle use bridges or temporary bridges.
15.2.6
Aesthetic Design Elements The primary goal of the aesthetic design is to build visual compatibility between the new elements and their current surroundings. The existing elements, along with proposed and existing structures, typically establish an identifiable visual characteristic. These existing elements such as lighting fixtures, railings street hardware, construction materials, colors, and finishes, are to be included as an integral part of the new construction program. Examples of new elements may include but are not limited to:
• Bridge structure type
• Bridge structure major elements such as pier and crossbeam form
• Bridge structure minor elements such as railings and light standards
Page 15-4
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
• Retaining wall materials, configuration and finishes
• Noise wall material, configuration and finishes: as viewed from the corridor
• Noise walls: as viewed from the neighborhoods
• Vista view points
• Median and roadside planting areas
• Color selection
• Opportunities for community funded art in accordance with Design Manual Chapter 950 Some design elements are planned to be functionally and visually consistent with features in the Project’s adjacent structures. Other elements benefit by retaining flexibility within a consistent palette of materials, colors, and design forms in order to provide the designbuild- process flexibility in developing potential solution. The final design and configuration of these Project features and other functional components will require ongoing communication, review, and coordination between the design-build Contractor’s design team and WSDOT’s review team.
15.2.7
Architectural Design Standards The RFP documents will include architectural standards. These will accommodate the functional requirements of the preferred design solution as well as address the contextual conditions of the Project area. They will be sensitive to corridor continuity as well as the scale, character and texture of the area. The standards will provide a reference for the Project’s context sensitive design and pass along the findings of the urban design analysis conducted during the Project’s planning and early design phases. The standards describe the Project’s urban design features and aide in the creation of an attractive facility that will be functional, maintainable over time, as well as add to the area’s visual character. Depending on the project complexity, the standards may be highly detailed and prescriptive or they may be more general in nature, such as a simple list of criteria.
15.2.8
Methods The design-builder shall comply with the architectural standards. The design-builder shall also be responsive to the existing urban design documents in the adjacent corridors. The design-builder shall employ the highest standard of care by implementing national best practices in urban design. The methods shall include, but not limited to, such techniques a Context Sensitive Design (CSS) and Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED).
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-5
Chapter 15
15.2.9
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Design-Builder Urban Design Team Where required in the RFP, the design-builder shall include aesthetic design team member resources. This shall include an experienced urban designer capable of working with other team members and to address final context sensitive design issues, construction details, and special project design features. The urban designer shall be an architect with urban project experience. The architect shall be licensed in the State of Washington and be responsible for the coordination and development of the project’s architectural components. Preference shall be given to a team with an architect experienced in bridge architecture. Preference shall also be given to teams where the architect has a current standing with professional organizations such as the American Institute of Architects (AIA) or the American Institute of City Planners (AICP). The architect shall seal the applicable design documents. When required by the RFP, and in order to assure consistency with the RFP architectural design standards, the design-builder shall form an Urban Design Team. The team shall consist of, as a minimum, a design builder project urban design manager, a WSDOT Bridge and Structures Office Structures Engineer, the WSDOT State Bridge and Structures Architect and the Region or HQ Principal Landscape Architect.
15.2.10
Analysis and Design Criteria for Structural Widenings and Modifications The widening of a bridge shall be of a similar superstructure type as the existing. The overall appearance and geometrical dimensions of the widening shall be the same or as close as possible to those of the existing structure. Materials used in the construction of the widening shall have the same thermal and elastic properties as the materials in the original structure. Prestressed concrete girders may be used to widen existing cast-in-place concrete structures. The members of the widening shall be proportioned to provide similar longitudinal and transverse load distribution characteristics as the existing structure. Differential settlement between the new and existing structures shall be taken into account. The design of the widening shall conform to current standards and not the standards used to design and construct the existing structure. The strength of the existing structure shall be checked utilizing current design standards. Existing components shall be strengthened as necessary so that their capacity/demand ratios are not worsened. Seismic design of bridge widenings shall be in accordance with Section 4.3. Diaphragms for the widening shall coincide with and be parallel to the existing diaphragms. Falsework for the widening shall be supported from the existing structure if the widening does not require additional girders or substructure. Otherwise, falsework for the widening shall not be supported from the existing structure. If the widening requires additional girders or substructure, a closure strip shall be provided. All falsework supporting the widening shall be released prior to placing concrete in the closure strip. Formwork supporting the closure strip shall be supported from the existing structure and the widening.
Page 15-6
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.2.11
Chapter 15
Bridge Security
15.2.11.A General Where required in the RFP, new bridges shall be designed for security. Bridge abutments in particular shall be designed to deter inappropriate public use and access by illegal urban campers. The Design-Build Contractor shall coordinate with the project urban design team to identify deterrence strategies. The principles of CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design) shall be employed with two strategic options. The first strategy employs natural surveillance and territorial reinforcement. For conditions where the first strategy is not feasible, then a second strategy shall be provided. The second strategy provides hard armoring, such as security fences. 15.2.11.B Natural Surveillance and Territorial Reinforcement The natural surveillance and territorial reinforcement strategy shall be provided through the following: 1.
The distance from the top of abutment wall to the finished grade at the face of abutment shall not be less than 10 feet in height and,
2.
Horizontal graded landform shelves at the abutment face beneath superstructures shall be omitted and,
3.
Alcove spaces within the abutment-superstructure interface shall be omitted and,
4.
Unobstructed views for law enforcement surveillance shall be provided.
15.2.11.C Hard Armoring The hard armoring strategy shall consist of one of the following or a combination of both: 1.
A security fence system with an anti-cut, anti-climb, galvanized steel welded wire mesh fabric. The steel welded wire mesh fabric shall have a minimum wire spacing of ½ inch for horizontal elements and 3 inches vertical elements. The minimum wire diameter shall be 0.162 inch (8 gauge) steel welded wire mesh. The fence system shall have the components shown in Figure 2.8.3-2. The bridge security fence shall not be connection to the bridge superstructure. The security fence may be attached to the bridge abutment, curtain walls, girder seats or retaining walls.
2.
Curtain walls may be used in lieu of a security fence system. Cast in place concrete, precast concrete, or concrete masonry unit materials may be constructed as curtain walls provided they meet the project urban design goals. Figure 2.8.3-1 shows a schematic view of the curtain wall option.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-7
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.3
Load Criteria
15.3.1
Scope AASHTO LRFD shall be the minimum design criteria used for all projects. Additional requirements, exceptions, and deviations from AASHTO LRFD requirements are contained herein.
15.3.2
Load Factors and Load Combinations A value of 1.0 shall be used for hi in Equation 3.4.1-1 of AASHTO LRFD except for the design of columns when a minimum value of gi is required by Article 3.4.1 of AASHTO LRFD. In such a case, hi shall be 0.95. Strength IV load combination shall not be used for foundation design. For foundation design, loads shall be factored after distribution through structural analysis or modeling. The design live load factor for the Service III Limit State load combination shall be as follows: γLL = 0.8 when the requirements of Sections 5.6.1 and 5.6.2 are satisfied and stress analysis is based on gross section properties. γLL = 1.0 when the requirements of Sections 5.6.1 and 5.6.2 are satisfied and stress analysis is based on transformed section properties. In special cases that deviate from the requirements of Sections 5.6.1 and 5.6.2 and have been approved by the WSDOT State Bridge Design Engineer, γLL, shall be as specified in the AASHTO LRFD. The Service III live load factor for load rating shall be 1.0. The live load factor for Extreme Event-I Limit State shall be 0.5. The base construction temperature shall be taken as 64°F for the determination of Temperature Load. The Load Factors for Permanent Loads Due to Superimposed Deformations are provided in Table 3.53. Table 3.5-3 replaces Table 3.4.1-3 of AASHTO LRFD.
15.3.3
Permanent Loads The design unit weights of common permanent loads shall be as shown in Table 3.8-1. 15.3.3.A
Future Deck Overlay Requirement
All new bridge designs with a concrete driving surface, excluding modified concrete overlays, shall be designed for a 35 psf future wearing surface load. The future wearing surface load does not apply to girder deflection, “A” dimension, creep, or profile grade calculations. Concrete bridge deck protection systems shall be in accordance with Section 5.7.4 for new bridge construction and widening projects.
Page 15-8
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.3.4
Chapter 15
Live Loads 15.3.4.A
Design Live Load
The design live load shall be:
• For new bridges and bridges that are modified in such a way to include new substructure elements – Live load in accordance with AASHTO LRFD
• For bridges modified in such a way that do not include new substructure elements – Live load criteria of the original design
• For bridges used for temporary detour or other temporary purposes – minimum 75 percent of HL-93 live load in accordance with AASHTO LRFD
• The application of design vehicular live loads shall be as specified in AASHTO LRFD Section 3.6.1.3. The design tandem, or “low boy”, defined in LRFD Section C3.6.1.1 shall be included in the design vehicular live load.
• The effect of one design tandem combined with the effect of the design lane load specified in LRFD Article 3.6.1.2.4 and, for negative moment between the points of contraflexure under a uniform load on all spans and reactions at interior supports, shall be investigated a dual design tandem spaced from 26.0 feet to 40.0 feet apart, measured between the trailing axle of the lead vehicle and the lead axle of the trailing vehicle, combined with the design lane load. For the purpose of this article, the pairs of the design tandem shall be placed in adjacent spans in such position to produce maximum force effect. Axles of the design tandem that do not contribute to the extreme force effect under consideration shall be neglected. 15.3.4.B
Live Load Deflection Evaluation
Article 2.5.2.6.2 of the AASHTO LRFD is mandatory in its entirety. 15.3.4.C
Distribution to Superstructure
15.3.4.C.1
Cross sections a, b, c, e, k, and also i and j if sufficiently connected to act as a unit from AASHTO LRFD Table 4.6.2.2.1-1
The live load distribution factor shall be as follows:
• For exterior girder design with slab cantilever length equal or less than 40 percent of the adjacent interior girder spacing, use the live load distribution factor for the adjacent interior girder. The slab cantilever length is defined as the distance from the centerline of the exterior girder to the edge of the slab.
• For exterior girder design with slab cantilever length exceeding 40 percent of the adjacent interior girder spacing, use the lever rule with the multiple presence factor of 1.0 for single lane to determine the live load distribution. The live load used to design the exterior girder shall not be less than the live load used for the adjacent interior girder.
• The rigid cross section analysis for steel beam-slab bridge cross sections described in AASHTO LRFD Section C4.6.2.2.2d shall not be used to determine live load distribution unless it can be demonstrated that the effectiveness of diaphragms on the lateral distribution of vehicular live load causes the cross section of the structure to deflect and rotate as a rigid cross section.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-9
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.3.4.C.2
Cross section Type d from AASHTO LRFD Table 4.6.2.2.1-1
This type of cross section shall be designed as a single unit. The live load force effects shall be that of a single lane of live load multiplied by the product of the live load distribution factor for interior girders computed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD and the total number of webs in the cross section. The correction factor for live load distribution for skewed supports as specified in AASHTO LRFD Tables 4.6.2.2.2e-1 and 4.6.2.2.3c1 for shear shall apply. 15.3.4.C.3
Distribution to Substructure
The number of traffic lanes to be used in the substructure design shall be determined by dividing the entire roadway slab width by 12-feet. No fractional lanes shall be used. Bridge deck widths of less than 24 feet shall have a minimum of two design lanes. 15.3.4.C.4
Distribution to Crossbeam
The design and load rating shall be distributed to the substructure by placing wheel line reactions in a lane configuration that generates the maximum force effects in the substructure. Live loads are considered to act directly on the substructure without further distribution through the superstructure as illustrated in Figure 3.9-1. For steel and prestressed concrete superstructure where the live load is transferred to substructure through bearings, cross frames or diaphragms, the girder reaction may be used for substructure design.
15.3.5
Noise Barrier Walls Wind on Noise Walls shall be as specified in AASHTO LRFD Sections 3.8.1, 3.8.1.2.4, and 15.8.2.
Page 15-10
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.4
Seismic Design and Retrofit
15.4.1
General
Chapter 15
This chapter and the AASHTO SEISMIC are the foundation seismic design criteria documents used to design highway bridges in Washington State. This chapter supplements and supersedes the AASHTO LRFD by providing WSDOT seismic design criteria, policy and practice. The importance classifications for all highway bridges in Washington State are classified as “Ordinary” except for special major bridges. Special major bridges fitting the classifications of either “Critical” or “Recovery” will be so designated in the RFP. Bridges are considered as Critical, Recovery, or Ordinary for their operational classification as described below. Two-level performance criteria are required for design of Recovery and Critical bridges.
• Critical Bridges Critical bridges are expected to provide immediate access to emergency and similar life-safety facilities after an earthquake. The Critical designation is typically reserved for high-cost projects where WSDOT intends to protect the investment or for projects that would be especially costly to repair if they were damaged during an earthquake.
• Recovery Bridges Recovery bridges serve as vital links for rebuilding damaged areas and provide access to the public shortly after an earthquake.
• Ordinary Bridges All bridges not designated as either Critical or Recovery shall be designated as Ordinary. The expected seismic performance, post-earthquake service levels, and post-earthquake damage states for Critical, Recovery, or Ordinary bridges shall be in accordance with Section 4.1.
15.4.2
WSDOT Additions and Modifications to AASHTO Guide Specifications for LRFD Seismic Bridge Design WSDOT modifications to the AASHTO SEISMIC are as follows: 15.4.2.A
Definitions
Guide Specifications Article 2 Revise existing definitions and add new definitions as follows:
• Oversized Pile Shaft A drilled shaft foundation that is larger in diameter than the supported column and has a reinforcing cage larger than and independent of the column’s reinforcement cage. The size of the shaft shall be in accordance with Section 7.8.2.
• Owner Person or agency having jurisdiction over the bridge. For WSDOT projects, regardless of delivery method, the term “Owner” in these Guide Specifications shall be the WSDOT State Bridge Design Engineer and/or the WSDOT State Geotechnical Engineer.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-11
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.4.2.B
Earthquake Resisting Systems (ERS) Requirements for Seismic Design Categories (SDCs) C and D
Guide Specifications Article 3.3 WSDOT Global Seismic Design Strategies:
• Type 1 Ductile Substructure with Essentially Elastic Superstructure. This category is permissible.
• Type 2 Essentially Elastic Substructure with a Ductile Superstructure. This category is not permissible.
• Type 3 Elastic Superstructure and Substructure with a Fusing Mechanism between the two. This category is not permissible. For Type 1 ERS for SDC C or D, if columns or pier walls are considered an integral part of the energy-dissipating system but remain elastic at the demand displacement, the forces to use for capacity design of other components shall be a minimum of 1.2 times the elastic forces resulting from the demand displacement in lieu of the forces obtained from overstrength plastic hinging analysis. Because maximum limiting inertial forces provided by yielding elements acting at a plastic mechanism level is not effective in the case of elastic design, the following constraints are imposed.
Page 15-12
1.
Unless an analysis that considers redistribution of internal structure forces due to inelastic action is performed, all substructure units of the frame under consideration and of any adjacent frames that may transfer inertial forces to the frame in question shall remain elastic at the design ground motion demand.
2.
Effective member section properties shall be consistent with the force levels expected within the bridge system. Reinforced concrete columns and pier walls shall be analyzed using cracked section properties. For this purpose in absence of better information or estimated by Figure 5.6.2-1, a moment of inertia equal to one-half that of the uncracked section shall be used.
3.
Foundation modeling shall be established such that uncertainties in modeling will not cause the internal forces of any elements under consideration to increase by more than 10 percent.
4.
When site-specific ground response analysis is performed, the response spectrum ordinates shall be selected such that uncertainties will not cause the internal forces of any elements under consideration to increase by more than 10 percent.
5.
Thermal, shrinkage, prestress or other forces that may be present in the structure at the time of an earthquake shall be considered to act in a sense that is least favorable to the seismic load combination under investigation.
6.
P-Delta effects shall be assessed using the resistance of the frame in question at the deflection caused by the design ground motion.
7.
Joint shear effects shall be assessed with a minimum of the calculated elastic internal forces applied to the joint.
8.
Detailing as normally required in either SDC C or D, as appropriate, shall be provided.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
Use of expected material strengths for the determination of member strengths except shear for elastic response of members is permitted. The use of elastic design in lieu of overstrength plastic hinging forces for capacity protection described above shall only be considered if designer demonstrates that capacity design of Article 4.11 of the AASHTO Guide Specifications for LRFD Bridge Seismic Design is not feasible due to geotechnical or structural reasons. If the columns or pier walls remain elastic at the demand displacement, shear design of columns or pier walls shall be based on 1.2 times elastic shear force resulting from the demand displacement and normal material strength shall be used for capacities. The minimum detailing according to the bridge seismic design category shall be provided. Type 3 ERS may be considered only if Type 1 strategy is not suitable and Type 3 strategy has been deemed necessary for accommodating seismic loads. Isolation bearings shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Guide Specifications for Seismic Isolation. Isolation bearings shall conform to Section 9.3. Limitations on the use of ERS and ERE are shown in BDM Figures 4.2.2-1, 4.2.2-2, 4.2.23, and 4.2.3-4.
• Figure 4.2.2-2 Type 6, connection with moment reducing detail should only be used at column base if proved necessary for foundation design. A fixed connection at base of column remains the preferred option for WSDOT bridges.
• The design criteria for column base with moment reducing detail shall consider all applicable loads at service, strength, and extreme event limit states.
• 4.2.2-3 Types 6 and 8 are not permissible for non-liquefied configuration and permissible for liquefied configuration. 15.4.2.C
Seismic Ground Shaking Hazard
Guide Specifications Article 3.4 For bridges that are considered Critical or Recovery or Ordinary bridges with a site Class F, the seismic ground shaking hazard shall be determined in accordance with the site specific procedure in Article 3.4.3 of the AASHTO SEISMIC. In cases where the site coefficients used to adjust mapped values of design ground motion for local conditions are inappropriate to determine the design spectra in accordance with general procedure of Article 3.4.1 (such as the period at the end of constant design spectral acceleration plateau (Ts) is greater than 1.0 second or the period at the beginning of constant design spectral acceleration plateau (To) is less than 0.2 second), a site-specific ground motion response analysis shall be performed. The spectral response parameters shall be determined using USGS 2014 Seismic Hazard Maps and Site Coefficients defined in Section 4.2.3. 15.4.2.D
Selection of Seismic Design Category (SDC)
Guide Specifications Article 3.5 A pushover analysis shall be used to determine displacement capacity for both SDCs C and D.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-13
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.4.2.E
Temporary and Staged Construction
Guide Specifications Article 3.6 For bridges that are designed for a reduced seismic demand, the contract plans shall either include a statement that clearly indicates that the bridge was designed as temporary using a reduced seismic demand or show the Acceleration Response Spectrum (ARS) used for design. No liquefaction assessment required for temporary bridges. 15.4.2.F
Load and Resistance Factors
Guide Specifications Article 3.7 Use load factors of 1.0 for all permanent loads. The load factor for live load shall be 0.0 when pushover analysis is used to determine the displacement capacity. Use a live load factor of 0.5 for all other extreme event cases. Unless otherwise noted, all ϕ factors shall be taken as 1.0. 15.4.2.G
Balanced Stiffness Requirements and Balanced Frame Geometry Recommendation
Guide Specifications Articles 4.1.2 and 4.1.3 Balanced stiffness between bents within a frame and between columns within a bent and balanced frame geometry for adjacent frames are required for bridges in both SDCs C and D. 15.4.2.H
Selection of Analysis Procedure to Determine Seismic Demand
Guide Specifications Article 4.2 Minimum requirements for the selection of the analysis procedure to determine seismic demand shall be as specified in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 of the Guide Specifications, except Procedure 1 (Equivalent Static Analysis) shall not be used for WSDOT Bridges. 15.4.2.I
Member Ductility Requirement for SDCs C and D
Guide Specifications Article 4.9 In-ground hinging for drilled shaft and pile foundations may be considered for the liquefied configuration if allowed by the RFP Criteria. 15.4.2.J
Longitudinal Restrainers
Guide Specifications Article 4.13.1 Longitudinal restrainers shall be provided at the expansion joints between superstructure segments. Restrainers shall be designed in accordance with the FHWA Seismic Retrofitting Manual for Highway Structure (FHWAHRT06032), Article 8.4, the Iterative Method. Restrainers shall be detailed in accordance with the requirements of Guide Specifications Article 4.13.3 and Bridge Design Manual Section 4.4.4. Restrainers may be omitted for SDCs C and D where the available seat width exceeds the calculated support length specified in Equation C4.13.1-1. Longitudinal restrainers shall not be used at the end piers (abutments).
Page 15-14
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.4.2.K
Chapter 15
Abutments
Guide Specifications Article 5.2 Abutments are revised as follows: 15.4.2.K.1
4.2.11.1 - General The participation of abutment walls in providing resistance to seismically induced inertial loads may be considered in the seismic design of bridges either to reduce column sizes or reduce the ductility demand on the columns. Damage to backwalls and wingwalls during earthquakes may be considered acceptable when considering no collapse criteria, provided that unseating or other damage to the superstructure does not occur. Abutment participation in the overall dynamic response of the bridge system shall reflect the structural configuration, the load transfer mechanism from the bridge to the abutment system, the effective stiffness and force capacity of the wall-soil system, and the level of acceptable abutment damage. The capacity of the abutments to resist the bridge inertial loads shall be compatible with the soil resistance that can be reliably mobilized, the structural design of the abutment wall, and whether the wall is permitted to be damaged by the design earthquake. The lateral load capacity of walls shall be evaluated on the basis of a rational passive earth-pressure theory. The participation of the bridge approach slab in the overall dynamic response of bridge systems to earthquake loading and in providing resistance to seismically induced inertial loads may be considered if allowed by the RFP Criteria.
15.4.2.K.2
4.2.11.2 - Longitudinal Direction
The abutment may be considered as part of the ERS for a continuous superstructure. If the abutment is considered as part of the longitudinal ERS, the abutment stiffness and capacity shall be determined as illustrated schematically in Figure 4.2.11-1a for semiintegral abutments, Figure 4.2.11-1b for L-shaped abutments with backwall fuse, and Figure 4.2.11-1c for L-shaped abutments without backwall fuse. Abutment Stiffness and Passive Pressure Estimate APPROACH SLAB APPROACH APPROACH SLABSLAB
60° 60°60°
(a) (a) SEMI-INTEGRAL (a) SEMI-INTEGRAL SEMI-INTEGRAL ABUTMENT ABUTMENT ABUTMENT
(a) Semi-integral Abutment
60° 60°60°
(B) (B) L-SHAPE (B) L-SHAPE L-SHAPE ABUTMENT ABUTMENT ABUTMENT BACKWALL BACKWALL BACKWALL FUSES FUSES FUSES
(b) L-shape Abutment Backwall Fuses
ACTIVE ACTIVE ACTIVE PRESSURE PRESSURE PRESSURE ZONEZONE ZONE
P P = 0.0
GRANULAR GRANULAR GRANULAR DRAINAGE DRAINAGE DRAINAGE MATERIAL MATERIAL MATERIAL
P P = 0.0
Hw Hw Hw ACTIVE ACTIVE ACTIVE PRESSURE PRESSURE PRESSURE ZONE ZONEZONE
P P = 0.0
GRANULAR GRANULAR GRANULAR DRAINAGE DRAINAGE DRAINAGE MATERIAL MATERIAL MATERIAL
Hw
Hw
PASSIVE PASSIVE PASSIVE PRESSURE PRESSURE PRESSURE ZONEZONE ZONE
Hw
2H W PP= 3 2H W PP= 3 2H W PP= 3
Hw
Hw Hw Hw ACTIVE ACTIVE ACTIVE PRESSURE PRESSURE PRESSURE ZONEZONE ZONE
APPROACH APPROACH SLABSLAB SLAB APPROACH
Hw
45° 45°45° PASSIVE PASSIVE PASSIVE PRESSURE PRESSURE PRESSURE ZONEZONE ZONE
Hw
Hw
PASSIVE PASSIVE PASSIVE PRESSURE PRESSURE PRESSURE ZONE ZONEZONE
Hw
APPROACH SLABSLAB APPROACH APPROACH SLAB 45° 45°45°
Hw
Figure 4.2.11-1
GRANULAR GRANULAR GRANULAR DRAINAGE DRAINAGE DRAINAGE MATERIAL MATERIAL MATERIAL
60° 60°60°
(C) (C) L-SHAPE (C) L-SHAPE L-SHAPE ABUTMENT ABUTMENT ABUTMENT BACKWALL BACKWALL BACKWALL DOESDOES NOT DOES NOT FUSE NOT FUSE FUSE
(c) L-shape Abutment Backwall Does Not Fuse
Figure Figure Figure 4.2.11-1 4.2.11-1 4.2.11-1 Abutments shall be designed to sustain the design earthquake displacements. The passive abutment resistance shall be limited to 70 percent of the value obtained using the Abutment Abutment Abutment stiffness stiffness stiffness and and and Passive Passive Passive Pressure Pressure Pressure Estimate Estimate Estimate procedure given in Article 4.2.11.2.1.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-15
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.4.2.K.3
4.2.11.2.1 - Abutment Stiffness and Passive Pressure Estimate
Abutment stiffness, Keff in kip/feet, and passive capacity, Pp in kips, shall be characterized by a bilinear or other higher order nonlinear relationship as shown in Figure 4.2.11-2. When the motion of the back wall is primarily translation, passive pressures may be assumed uniformly the backwall or end diaphragm. The Pp = PPppdistributed P Hpppwp= WHpwwwpWH Wwwwover Ww the height (Hw) of (5.2.2.1-1) (5.2.2.1-1) (5.2.2.1-1) (5.2.2.1-1) p= p= pH total passive force shall be determined as:
where: where: where: where:
Pp = pp Hw Ww
(4.2.11.2.1-1)
Where: pp = passive lateral earth pressure behind backwall or diaphragm (ksf) Hw = height of back wall or end diaphragm exposed to passive earth pressure (feet) =Hwheight =height = of height back ofofback back ofwall back wall wall orwall end ororend end diaphragm or end diaphragm diaphragm diaphragm exposed exposed exposed exposed to passive totopassive passive to passive earth earth earth pressure earth pressure pressure pressure (ft)(ft) (ft)(ft) Hw H w=H wheight Ww = width of back wall or diaphragm (feet)
pp =ppppassive ppassive = passive lateral lateral lateral earth lateral earth earth pressure earth pressure pressure pressure behind behind behind behind backwall backwall backwall backwall or diaphragm orordiaphragm diaphragm or diaphragm (ksf) (ksf) (ksf) (ksf) p== ppassive
=Wwwidth =width =of width back ofofback back ofwall back wall wall orwall diaphragm orordiaphragm diaphragm or diaphragm (ft)(ft) (ft)(ft) Ww W W w= wwidth Figure 4.2.11-2 Characterization of Abutment Capacity and Stiffness
(a) Semi-integral (a) Semi-integral Abutment Abutment
Abutment (a) (a) (a)(a) Semi-integral (a)Semi-integral Semi-integral Semi-integral Semi-integral Abutment Abutment Abutment Abutment
15.4.2.K.4
(b) L-shape (b) L-shape Abutment Abutment (b):(b): L-shape L-shape Abutment Abutment (b): (b): L-shape L-shape Abutment Abutment (b) L-shape Abutment
4.2.11.2.2 - Calculation of Best Estimate Passive Pressure Pp
Figure Figure Figure Figure 5.2.2.15.2.2.15.2.2.15.2.2.1Characterization Characterization Characterization Characterization of Abutment ofofAbutment Abutment of Abutment Capacity Capacity Capacity Capacity andand and Stiffness and Stiffness Stiffness Stiffness
If the strength characteristics of compacted or natural soils in the “passive pressure BDM BDM BDM Figure BDM Figure Figure 4.2.11-2 Figure 4.2.11-2 4.2.11-2 4.2.11-2 zone” are known, then the passive force for a given height, Hw, shall be calculated using accepted analysis procedures. These procedures should account for the interface friction between the wall and the soil. The properties used shall be those indicative of 5.2.2.25.2.2.25.2.2.25.2.2.2Calculation Calculation Calculation Calculation of Best ofofBest Best ofEstimate Best Estimate Estimate Estimate Passive Passive Passive Passive Pressure Pressure Pressure Pressure Pp PPp p Pp the entire “passive pressure zone” as indicated in Figure 1. Therefore, the properties of backfill present immediately adjacent to the wall in the active pressure zone may not be If the IfIfthe strength the If strength the strength strength characteristics characteristics characteristics characteristics of compacted ofofcompacted compacted of compacted or natural orornatural natural or natural soils soils soils insoils the ininthe "passive the in "passive the "passive "passive pressure pressure pressure pressure appropriate as a weaker failure surface can develop elsewhere in the embankment.
zone" zone" zone" are zone" are known, areknown, are known, known, then then then thethen the passive thepassive the passive passive force force force for force for afor given afor agiven given aheight, given height, height, height, Hw,Hmay Hw,w,may Hmay bemay calculated be becalculated calculated be calculated us-usus-usw,
For L-shape abutments where the backwall isprocedures notprocedures designed to fuse, Hfor conservatively w shall inging accepted ingaccepted ing accepted accepted analysis analysis analysis analysis procedures. procedures. procedures. procedures. These These These procedures These procedures should should should should account account account account for the forthe for interface theinterface the interface interface be taken as the depth of the superstructure, unless a more rational soil-structure friction friction friction friction between between between between thethe wall thewall the wall and wall and and theand the soil. thesoil. the soil. The soil. The The properties The properties properties properties used used used shall used shall shall beshall those be bethose those beindicative those indicative indicative indicative of ofof of interaction analysis is performed.
thethe entire theentire the entire "passive entire "passive "passive "passive pressure pressure pressure pressure zone" zone" zone" as zone" indicated asasindicated indicated as indicated in Figure ininFigure Figure in Figure 1. 1.Therefore, 1. Therefore, 1.Therefore, Therefore, thethe properties theproperties the properties properties
Ifofpresumptive passive pressures areadjacent to adjacent betoused for design, then the following criteria shall backfill ofofbackfill backfill of backfill present present present present immediately immediately immediately immediately adjacent adjacent the totothe wall the to wall the wall in wall the ininthe active the in active the active pressure active pressure pressure pressure zone zone zone may zone may may may apply:
notnot be notappropriate be not beappropriate appropriate be appropriate as aasas weaker aaas weaker weaker a weaker failure failure failure failure surface surface surface surface cancan can develop can develop develop develop elsewhere elsewhere elsewhere elsewhere in the ininthe embankthe in embankthe embankembank• Soil in the “passive pressure zone” shall be compacted in accordance with Standard ment. ment. ment. ment. Specifications Section 2-03.3(14)I.
• For For cohesionless, nonplastic backfill (fines content less than 30designed percent), the passive For For L-shape For L-shape L-shape L-shape abutments abutments abutments abutments where where where where thethe the backwall the backwall backwall backwall is not isisnot not is designed not designed designed to fuse, totofuse, fuse, toHfuse, HwwHw wH pressure pp shall be assumed equal to 2Hw/3 ksf per foot of wall length. shall shall shall conservatively shall conservatively conservatively conservatively be be taken betaken be taken taken as as the asthe as the depth the depth depth depth of of the ofthe of the superstructure, the superstructure, superstructure, superstructure, unless unless unless unless a aa a
• For other cases, including abutments constructed in cuts, the passive pressures shall more more more rational more rational rational rational soil-structure soil-structure soil-structure interaction interaction interaction interaction analysis analysis analysis analysis is performed. isisperformed. performed. is performed. be developed bysoil-structure a Geotechnical Engineer.
If presumptive IfIfpresumptive presumptive If presumptive passive passive passive passive pressures pressures pressures pressures areare to arebe to are toused be be toused used beforused for design, fordesign, for design, design, then then then thethen the following thefollowing the following following criteria criteria criteria criteria shall shall shall apply: shall apply: apply: apply: Page 15-16
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
semi-integral or L-shape abutments initial secant stiffness may be determined as follows: Calculation of Passive Soil Stiffness Chapter 4 Design Requirements5.2.2.3Seismic Design and Retrofit Structural for Design-Build Contracts Chapter 15 P
p 4.2.11.2.34.2.11.2.3
- Calculation of Passive Soil Stiffness Equivalent linear stiffness, KeffStiffness in kip/ft,(5.2.2.3-1) is required for analyses. For Ksecant = Passive 15.4.2.K.5
- Calculation Soil eff 1of
wHw ) semi-integral or L-shape(Fabutments initial secant stiffness may be determined as fol-
Equivalent linear linear secant secant stiffness, stiffness, KKeff kip/feet, is required analyses. semi-integral is required forfor analyses. ForFor semi-integral Equivalent eff in kip/ft, lows: or L-shape L-shape abutments abutments initial secant stiffness may be determined as follows: or initial secant stiffness may be determined as follows: where:
5.2.2.3- Calculation of Passive Pp Soil Stiffness Pp = passive lateral K earth pressure capacity (kip) (5.2.2.3-1) = (4.2.11.2.3-1) (4.2.11.2.3-1) eff 1 ( ) F H w w Equivalent linear secant stiffness, Keff in kip/ft, is required for analyses. For Where: Hw = height oforback wall (ft) Where: semi-integral L-shape abutments initial secant stiffness may be determined as folwhere: PPp == passive lateral earth pressure capacity passive lateral earth pressure capacity (kip) (kip) lows: p 5.2.2.3Calculation of Passive Soil Stiffness H = height of back wall (feet) F = the value of F to use for a particular bridge may be found in Table C3.11.1-1 of w w Hww = height of back wall (feet) P = passive lateral earth pressure capacity (kip) p FFw == the value of Fw to use for a particular bridge may be found in C3.11.1-1 Table C3.11.1-1 the AASHTO LRFD the value of Fw to use for a Bridge particular bridge Specifications. is found in Table of theof the w Pp Design AASHTO LRFD. Equivalent linearKsecant stiffness, Keff in kip/ft,(5.2.2.3-1) is required for analyses. For AASHTO LRFD. eff 1 = ( ) F H H = height of back wall (ft) w w w semi-integral or L-shape initial secant be stiffness may as folFor L-shape the abutments, theabutments expansion gap should included in be thedetermined initial estimate of For L-shape L-shape abutments, abutments, the expansion gap gap should shall bebe included inin the initial estimate ofof the For expansion included the initial estimate the lows: the secant stiffness specified in: secant stiffness stiffness specified in:Fas to bFw as secant specified in: =asthe value of use for a particular bridge may be found in Table C3.11.1-1 of where: w the AASHTO LRFD Bridge PPpp Design Specifications. (5.2.2.3-1) Pp = passive lateralKK earth pressure (kip)(5.2.2.3-2) eff 1eff=1 = (4.2.2.3-2) (4.2.11.2.3-2) (Fw(HFww H+ wD)gcapacity ) For L-shape abutments, the expansion gap should be included in the initial estimate of Where: Hthe of back wall (ft) w = height Where: secant stiffness as specified in: = where: width of gap between backwall and superstructure (feet) Dg where: Dg = width of gap between backwall and superstructure (feet) Fw = the value of Fw to use for Papparticular bridge may be found in Table C3.11.1-1 of For and where pushover analyses are values For SDCs SDCs CCD and D, where pushover analyses are conducted, conducted, values of of and the the initial initial width of gap between backwall and superstructure (ft)PP and Kearth Pg p==D, passive lateral eff 1 = pressure capacity (kip)(5.2.2.3-2) pp the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Specifications. behavior of the (Fw Haw bilinear +Design D g ) load-displacement estimate of K should be used to define
estimate of Keff1 eff1 should be used to define a bilinear load-displacement behavior of the abutment for for the capacity assessment. abutment the capacity assessment. For SDCs C and D, where pushover analyses are conducted, values of Pp and the iniH w = height of back wall (ft)
For L-shape abutments, the expansion gap should be included in the initial estimate of where: tial estimate of Keff1 should be used to define a bilinear load-displacement behavior of secant stiffnessPressure as specified in: in the Longitudinal Direction 15.4.2.K.6
- Transverse Direction 4.2.11.2.44.2.11.3
- the Modeling Passive Stiffness Fwabutment = the value Fwcapacity to use for a particular bridge may be found in Table C3.11.1-1 of the forofthe assessment. Dg = width of gap between backwall and in superstructure (ft) Transverse stiffness of abutments may be considered the overall dynamic response AASHTO LRFD Design Specifications. In the longitudinalthe direction, when the Bridge bridge is moving toward the soil, the full passiveof (5.2.2.3-2) bridge systems if allowed by RFP Criteria. The transverse abutment stiffness used in the Passive Pressure inmoves the Longitudinal Direction resistance of5.2.2.4-Modeling the soil may be mobilized, but whenStiffness the bridge away from the soil no For SDCs C and D, where pushover analyses are conducted, values of P and the inipof elastic demand models shall be taken the as 50-percent of the elastic transverse stiffness For L-shape abutments, expansion gap should be included in the initial soil resistance is mobilized. Since passive pressure acts at only one abutment at a time, estimate of tial estimate of Keff1 should be used tobridge defineisa moving bilinear toward load-displacement the adjacentInthe bent. thesecant longitudinal direction, when thea soil, thebehavior full pas- of stiffness asframe specified in:the models linear elasticwhere: dynamic models and pushover should only include passive the resistance abutment to for thesoil capacity assessment. sive of fuse the may be mobilized, but stiffness whenlevel thevalues bridge moves away from Girder stops areat expected the design eventSecant earthquake of acceleration pressure spring one abutment inatany given model. for passive P to limit the demand and the damage and supporting piles/ the no soil resistance isbackwall mobilized. Since passive pressure acts at only one p in the abutments pressure shall developed independently for each abutment. D =soil width ofcontrol gap between and superstructure (ft) KPassive gbe eff 1 = 5.2.2.4-Modeling Pressure Stiffness in(5.2.2.3-2) the Longitudinal Direction ( ) F H + D shafts. The forces generated with elastic demand assessment models shall not be w w dynamic g abutment at a time, linear elastic models and frame pushoverused models should As an alternative, for straight or with horizontal curves up to 30 degrees single frame to size the abutment girder stops. Girder stops for abutments supported on a spread only include a passive pressure spring one abutment in any given model. Secant For C and D, where pushover analyses are values of Pp and the iniIn SDCs the longitudinal direction, when theatbridge is conducted, moving toward the soil, the full pasfooting shall be designed to sustain the lesser of the acceleration coefficient, As, times the bridges, andstiffness compression models in straight multi-frame bridges where the passive where: values for passive pressure shall be developed independently for each abuttial estimate of K should be used to define a bilinear load-displacement behavior of eff1the soil may be mobilized, but when the bridge moves away from sive resistance of superstructure dead load reaction atabutments, the abutment plus the of at abutment and its pressure stiffness is similar between a spring mayweight be used each abutment ment. the abutment for resistance the of capacity assessment. the no soil isbackwall mobilized. passive pressure acts at only footing or sliding friction spread footings. Girder stops pile/shaft-supported D =soil width offorces gapassigned between and superstructure (ft) concurrently. Ing this case, the spring values atSince each end for need to be reduced by one abutment a time, dynamic models and frame foundations shall be to linear sustainelastic the sum of 75 percent totalpassive lateralpushover capacitymodels ofacts should half because5.2.2.4-Modeling they actdesigned inatsimultaneously, whereas the actual resistance Passive Pressure Stiffness inbackfill the Longitudinal Direction the piles/shafts and shear capacity of one wingwall. onlySDCs include a one passive pressure spring at one in any given model. Secant For and D,time. where pushover analyses are conducted, values of Pp and the inionly in one direction andCat Correspondingly, theabutment actual peak passive resistance stiffness values for passive pressure shall developed independently for abut-of should be used to define a moving bilinear load-displacement behavior estimate of K force at either abutment be equal to the sum of thebe peak forces developed two eff1 The stiffness of fusing orwill breakaway abutment elements such as wingwalls (yielding or Intial the longitudinal direction, when the bridge is toward thein soil, theeach full pasment. the abutment for thesoil capacity assessment. non-yielding), elastomeric and sliding footingspressure shall notshall be upon to reduce springs. In this case, secantbearings, stiffness values formobilized, passive be developed based sive resistance of the may be but when therelied bridge moves away from displacement at intermediate on the sum of peak forces developed each spring. Since If computed thedemands soil no soil resistance in is piers. mobilized. passiveabutment pressure forces acts at exceed only one 5.2.2.4-Modeling Passive Pressure Stiffness in the Longitudinal Direction the soil fixed capacity, the stiffness should be softened iteratively until abutment displacements Unless bearings are used, girder stops shall be provided between all girders abutment at a time, linear elastic dynamic models and frame pushover models should are consistent (within 30seismic percent)demand. with theThe assumed regardless of the elastic designstiffness. of girder stops shall accommodate
only include a passive pressurewhen spring one abutment in any given Secant In the longitudinal direction, theatbridge is moving toward themodel. soil, the full passive resistance of the soil may be mobilized, but when the bridge moves away from ment. the soil no soil resistance is mobilized. Since passive pressure acts at only one abutment at a time, linear elastic dynamic models and frame pushover models should only include a passive pressure spring at one abutment in any given model. Secant stiffness values for passive pressure shall be developed independently23-50.20 for each abutPage 4-16Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M WSDOT Page 15-17 ment.   unequal forces that may develop in each stop. shall be developed independently for each abutstiffness values for passive pressure
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
When fusing girder stops, transverse shear keys, or other elements that potentially release the restraint of the superstructure are used, then adequate support length meeting the requirements of Article 4.12 of the AASHTO SEISMIC shall be provided. Additionally, the expected redistribution of internal forces in the superstructure and other bridge system element shall be considered. Bounding analyses considering incremental release of transverse restraint at each end of the bridge shall also be considered. 15.4.2.K.7
4.2.11.4 - Curved and Skewed Bridges
The passive pressure resistance in soils behind semi-integral or L-shape abutments shall be based on the projected width of the abutment wall normal to the centerline of the bridge. Abutment springs shall be included in the local coordinate system of the abutment wall. 15.4.2.L
Foundation – General
Guide Specifications Article 5.3.1 The required Foundation Modeling Method (FMM) and the requirements for estimation of foundation springs for spread footings, pile foundations, and drilled shafts shall be Modeling Method II as defined in Table 5.3.1-1. 15.4.2.M
Foundation – Spread Footing
Guide Specifications Article C5.3.2 Foundation springs for spread footings shall be determined in accordance with Section 7.2.7 and Geotechnical Design Manual Section 6.5.1.1. 15.4.2.N
Procedure 3: Nonlinear Time History Method
Guide Specifications Article 5.4.4 The time histories of acceleration used to describe the earthquake loads shall be selected in accordance with Geotechnical Design Manual Section 6-A.6. 15.4.2.O
Ieff for Box Girder Superstructure
Guide Specifications Article 5.6.3 The gross moment of inertia shall be used for box girder superstructure modeling. 15.4.2.P
Foundation Rocking
Guide Specifications Article 6.3.9 Foundation rocking shall not be used for the design of WSDOT bridges. 15.4.2.Q
Drilled Shafts
Guide Specifications Article C6.5 For WSDOT bridges, the scale factor for p-y curves or subgrade modulus for large diameter shafts shall not be used.
Page 15-18
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.4.2.R
Chapter 15
Longitudinal Direction Requirements
Guide Specifications Article 6.7.1 Case 2: Earthquake Resisting System (ERS) with abutment contribution may be used provided that the mobilized longitudinal passive pressure is not greater than 70 percent of the value obtained using the procedure given in Article 5.2.2.1. 15.4.2.S
Liquefaction Design Requirements
Guide Specifications Article 6.8 Soil liquefaction assessment shall be based on Geotechnical Design Manual Section 6.4.2.8. 15.4.2.T
Reinforcing Steel
Longitudinal reinforcement for ductile members in SCD’s B, C & D, including foundations where in-ground-hinging is considered as part of the ERS, shall conform to ASTM A706 Grade 60. See Section 5.1.2 for other requirements. For SDCs B, C, and D, the moment-curvature analyses based on strain compatibility and nonlinear stress strain relations shall be used to determine the plastic moment capacities of all ductile concrete members. The properties of reinforcing steel, as specified in Table 8-4.2-1, shall be used. Deformed welded wire fabric shall not be used. 15.4.2.U
Concrete Modeling
Guide Specifications Article 8.4.4 Where in-ground plastic hinging is part of the ERS, the confined concrete core shall be limited to a maximum compressive strain of 0.008 and the member ductility demand shall be limited to 4 maximum. 15.4.2.V
Expected Nominal Moment Capacity
Guide Specifications Article 8.5 Replace the definition of λmo with the following: λmo = overstrength factor = 1.2 for ASTM A 706 Grade 60 reinforcement =1.4 for ASTM A 615 Grade 60 reinforcement 15.4.2.W Interlocking Bar Size Guide Specifications Article 8.6.7 The longitudinal reinforcing bar inside the interlocking portion of a column (interlocking bars) shall be the same size of bars used outside the interlocking portion.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-19
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.4.2.X
Splicing of Longitudinal Reinforcement in Columns Subject to Ductility Demands for SDCs C and D
Guide Specifications Article 8.8.3 The splicing of longitudinal column reinforcement outside the plastic hinging region shall be accomplished using mechanical couplers that are capable of developing the tensile strength of the spliced bar. Splices shall be staggered at least 2 feet. Lap splices shall not be used. The design engineer shall clearly identify the locations where splices in longitudinal column reinforcement are permitted on the plans. In general where the length of the rebar cage is less than 60 feet (72 feet for No. 14 and No. 18 bars), no splice in the longitudinal reinforcement shall be allowed. 15.4.2.Y
Development Length for Column Bars Extended into Oversized Pile Shafts for SDCs C and D
Guide Specifications Article 8.8.10 Extending column bars into oversized shaft shall be in accordance with Section 7.4.4.C, based on TRAC Report WARD 417.1 “Non-Contact Lap Splice in Bridge Column Shaft Connections”. 15.4.2.Z
Lateral Confinement for Oversized Pile Shaft for SDCs C and D
Guide Specifications Article 8.8.12 The requirement of this article for shaft lateral reinforcement in the column-shaft splice zone may be replaced with the requirements of Section 7.8.2.K. 15.4.2.AA Lateral Confinement for Non-Oversized Strengthened Pile Shaft for SDCs C and D Guide Specifications Article 8.8.13 Non-oversized column-shaft (the cross section of the confined core is the same for both the column and the pile shaft) is not permissible unless allowed by the RFP Criteria. 15.4.2.AB Requirements for Capacity Protected Members Guide Specifications Article 8.9 For SDCs C and D where liquefaction is identified, pile and drilled shaft inground hinging may be considered as an ERE. Bridges shall be analyzed and designed for the non-liquefied condition and the liquefied condition in accordance with Article 6.8. The capacity protected members shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4.11. To ensure the formation of plastic hinges in columns, oversized pile shafts shall be designed for an expected nominal moment capacity, Mne, at any location along the shaft, that is, equal to 1.25 times moment demand generated by the overstrength column plastic hinge moment and associated shear force at the base of the column. The safety factor of 1.25 may be reduced to 1.0 depending on the soil properties. The design moments below ground for extended pile shaft may be determined using the nonlinear static procedure (pushover analysis) by pushing them laterally to the displacement demand obtained from an elastic response spectrum analysis. The point of maximum moment shall be identified based on the moment diagram. The expected plastic Page 15-20
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
hinge zone shall extend 3D above and below the point of maximum moment. The plastic hinge zone shall be designated as a “no splice” zone and the transverse steel for shear and confinement shall be provided accordingly. 15.4.2.AC Superstructure Capacity Design for Transverse Direction (Integral Bent Cap) for SDCs C and D Guide Specifications Article 8.11 For SDCs C and D, the longitudinal flexural bent cap beam reinforcement shall be continuous. Splicing of cap beam longitudinal flexural reinforcement shall be accomplished using mechanical couplers that are capable of developing the tensile strength of the spliced bar. Splices shall be staggered at least 2 feet. Lap splices shall not be used. 15.4.2.AD Superstructure Design for Non Integral Bent Caps for SDCs B, C, and D Guide Specifications Article 8.12 Non integral bent caps shall not be used for continuous concrete bridges in SDC B, C, and D except at the expansion joints between superstructure segments. 15.4.2.AE Integral Bent Cap Joint Shear Design Guide Specifications Article 8.13.4.1.1 In addition to the T-joints listed in Article 8.13.4.1.1, the exterior column joints for box girder superstructure and other superstructures if the cap beam extends the joint far enough to develop the longitudinal cap reinforcement shall be considered T-joints for joint shear analysis in the transverse direction. 15.4.2.AF Cast-in-Place and Precast Concrete Piles Guide Specifications Article 8.16.2 Minimum longitudinal reinforcement of 0.75 percent of Ag shall be provided for CIP piles in SDCs B, C, and D. Longitudinal reinforcement shall be provided for the full length of pile. 15.4.2.AG Seismic Resiliency using Innovative Materials and Construction Innovative materials and bridge construction are ideas that encourage engineers to consider principles that will enhance bridge performance, speed up construction, or add any other benefit to the industry. BDM Section 14.4 describes the self-centering columns that are designed restore much of their original shape after a seismic event. They’re intended to improve the serviceability of a bridge after an earthquake. Self-centering columns are constructed with a precast concrete column segment with a duct running through it longitudinally. They rest on footings with post-tensioning (PT) strand developed into them. Once the precast column piece is set on the footing, the PT strand threads through the duct and gets anchored into the crossbeam above the column. The PT strand is unbonded to the column segment. As a column experiences a lateral load, the PT strand elastically stretches to absorb the seismic energy and returns to its original tension load after the seismic event. The expectation is the column would rotate as a rigid body and the PT strand would almost spring the column back to its original orientation. Like selfcentering columns, Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) and Engineered Cementitious Composite (ECC) products are introduced into bridge design as a means to improve ductility, seismic WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-21
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
resilience, and serviceability of a bridge after an earthquake. SMA is a class of alloys that are manufactured from either a combination of nickel and titanium or copper, magnesium and aluminum. The alloy is shaped into round bars in sizes similar to conventional steel reinforcement. When stressed, the SMA can undergo large deformations and return to original shape.
15.4.3
Seismic Design Requirements for Bridge Modifications and Widening Projects 15.4.3.A
Seismic Analysis and Retrofit Policy
The Seismic Analysis and Retrofit Policy for Bridge Modifications and Widening Projects shall conform to Sections 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3, and 4.3.4. Specific seismic requirements for widening of Recovery and Critical bridges are provided in FRP Section 2.13 and Section 4.3.3. The spectral response parameters shall be determined using USGS 2014 Seismic Hazard Maps and Site Coefficients defined in Section 4.2.3. 15.4.3.B
Design and Detailing Considerations
15.4.3.B.1
Support Length
The support length at existing abutments, piers, inspan hinges, and pavement seats shall be checked. If there is a need for longitudinal restrainers, transverse restrainers, or additional support length on the existing structure, they shall be included in the widening design. 15.4.3.B.2
Connections Between Existing and New Elements
Connections between the existing elements and new elements shall be designed for maximum overstrength forces. Where yielding is expected in the crossbeam connection at the extreme event limit state, the new structure shall be designed to carry live loads independently at the Strength I limit state. In cases where large differential settlement and/or a liquefaction induced loss of bearing strength are expected, the connections may be designed to deflect or hinge in order to isolate the two parts of the structure. Elements subject to inelastic behavior shall be designed and detailed to sustain the expected deformations. Longitudinal joints that isolate the decks between the existing and new structures are not permitted. 15.4.3.B.3
Differential Settlement
The designer shall evaluate the potential for differential settlement between the existing structure and widening structure. Additional geotechnical measures may be required to limit differential settlements to tolerable levels for both static and seismic conditions. The bridge designer shall evaluate, design, and detail all elements of new and existing portions of the widened structure for the differential settlement warranted by the Geotechnical Engineer. Angular distortions between adjacent foundations shall not exceed 0.008 (RAD) in simple spans and 0.004 (RAD) in continuous spans.
Page 15-22
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
The horizontal displacement of pile and shaft foundations shall be estimated using procedures that consider soil structure interaction (see Geotechnical Design Manual Section 8.12.2.3). Horizontal movement criteria shall be established at the top of the foundation based on the tolerance of the structure to lateral movement with consideration of the column length and stiffness. Tolerance of the superstructure to lateral movement will depend on bridge seat widths, bearing type(s), structure type, and load distribution effects. 15.4.3.B.4
Foundation Types
The foundation type of the new structure should match that of the existing structure. However, a different type of foundation may be used for the new structure due to geotechnical recommendations or the limited space available between existing and new structures. For example, a shaft foundation may be used in lieu of spread footing. 15.4.3.B.5
Existing Strutted Columns
The horizontal strut between existing columns may be removed. The existing columns shall then be analyzed with the new unbraced lengths and retrofitted if necessary. 15.4.3.B.6
Non Structural Element Stiffness
Median barriers and other potentially stiffening elements shall be isolated from the columns to allow column deformation. Deformation capacities of existing bridge members that do not meet current detailing standards shall be determined using the provisions of Section 7.8 of the Retrofitting Manual for Highway Structures: Part 1 – Bridges, FHWAHRT06032. Deformation capacities of existing bridge members that meet current detailing standards shall be determined using the latest edition of the AASHTO SEISMIC. In lieu of specific data, the reinforcement properties provided in Table 4.3.5-1 shall be used. 15.4.3.B.7
Isolation Bearings
Isolation bearings may be used for bridge widening projects to reduce the seismic demand through modification of the dynamic properties of the bridge. Isolation bearings shall be designed in accordance with AASHTO Guide Specifications for Seismic Isolation and shall conform to Section 9.3.
15.4.4
Seismic Retrofitting of Existing Bridges Seismic retrofitting of existing bridges shall be performed in accordance with the FHWA publication FHWA HRT 06032, Seismic Retrofitting Manual for Highway Structures: Part 1 – Bridges as follows:
• Article 1.5.3 The spectral response parameters shall be determined using USGS 2014 Seismic Hazard Maps and Site Coefficients defined in Section 4.2.3.
• Article 7.4.2 Seismic Loading in Two or Three Orthogonal Revise the first paragraph as follows: When combining the response of two or three orthogonal directions the design value of any quantity of interest (displacement, bending moment, shear or axial force) shall be obtained by the 100-30 percent combination rule as described in AASHTO SEISMIC Article 4.4.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-23
Chapter 15
Revise the Revise the first first paragraph paragraph as as follows: follows: Revise Revise the the first first paragraph paragraph as as follows: follows: When combining the response of two or directions th Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contractsdirections When combining the response of two or three three orthogonal orthogonal th When combining the of orthogonal directions th When combining the response response of two two or or three three orthogonal directions th of any quantity of interest (displacement, bending moment, shear or ax of any quantity of interest (displacement, bending moment, shear or ax of any quantity of interest (displacement, bending moment, shear or aa of any quantity of interest (displacement, bending moment, shear or obtained by the 100-30 percent combination rule as described in AA
• Delete Eq. 7.44 and replacebe with the following: be obtained by the 100-30 percent combination rule as described in AA be obtained by the 100-30 percent combination rule as described in A be obtained byArticle the 100-30 percent combination rule as described in A Specifications 4.4. Specifications Article 4.4. Specifications Article 4.4. Lp = the maximum of [(8800εydb) or (0.08L (7-44) Specifications Article 4.4.+ 4400εydb)] Delete Eq. 7.49 and replace with the following:
• 7.49 and replace with the following:
• Delete Eq. 7.49 and replace •with the Eq. following: Delete Eq.
•• Delete Delete Eq. 7.49 7.49 and and replace replace with with the the following: following:   V − V   φφφp ===555VVii i −−VVmmm +++222φφφy  y pp   V − V   VVii i −−VVff f   y  
• Delete Eq. 7.51 and replace•with the following:
with with the the following: following:
•• Delete Eq. 7.51 7.51 and and replace replace with with the the following: following:
• Delete Eq.  VVji −−VVjh   φφφpp ===444 V jiji − V jhjh +++222φφφyy p   VVjfjf   y − jiji −  VV V V jf   − ji 
15.4.4.A
Seismic Analysis Requirements
4.4.1 Seismic Analysis Requirements 4.4.1 Seismic Analysis Requirements 4.4.1 Seismic Analysis Requirements 4.4.1 Seismic Analysis Requirements The multi-mode spectral analysis of Seismic Retrofitting Manual Section 5.4.2.2 (asthe a existing structure The first step in retrofitting aa bridge is analyze The first step in retrofitting bridge isisto to analyze the structure The first step in retrofitting a bridge to analyze the existing structur minimum) shall be used to determine the seismic displacement and force demands toexisting The first step in retrofitting a bridge is to analyze the existing structur seismically deficient elements. The initial analysis consists of generati seismically deficient elements. The initial analysis consists of generati seismically deficient elements. The initial analysis consists of generat identify seismically deficient elements of the existing structure. Prescriptive requirements, seismically deficient elements. The initial analysis consists of generat capacity/demand ratios for all relevant bridge components. Seismic di capacity/demand ratios for all relevant bridge components. Seismic di capacity/demand ratios for all relevant bridge components. Seismic di such as support length, shall beforce considered mandatory and shall be included in the capacity/demand ratios for all relevant bridge components. Seismic d demands shall be determined using the multi-mode spectral anal force demands shall be determined using the multi-mode spectral anal force demands shall be determined using the multi-mode spectral ana analysis. Seismic capacities shallRetrofitting be determined in accordance with the requirements force demands shall be determined using the multi-mode spectral ana Manual Section 5.4.2.2 (as aa minimum). Prescriptive requ Retrofitting Manual Section 5.4.2.2 (as requ Retrofitting Manual Section 5.4.2.2 (as aaminimum). minimum). Prescriptive requ of the Seismic Retrofitting Manual. Displacement capacities shall be determined byand thePrescriptive Retrofitting Manual Section 5.4.2.2 (as minimum). Prescriptive requ as support length, shall be considered mandatory shall be included as support length, shall be considered mandatory and shall be included as support length, shall be considered mandatory and shall be include Method D2 – Structure Capacity/Demand (Pushover) Method of Seismic Retrofitting as support length, shall be considered mandatory and shall be include Seismic capacities shall determined accordance the Seismic capacities shall be be determined in in accordance with with the requirem requirem Seismic capacities be in with require Manual Section 5.6. SeismicRetrofitting capacities shall shall be determined determined in accordance accordance with the the require Seismic Manual. Displacement capacities shall be determi Seismic Retrofitting Manual. Displacement capacities shall be determi Seismic Retrofitting Manual. Displacement capacities shall be Seismic Retrofitting Displacement capacitiesMethod shall beofdeterm determ D2 –– Structure Capacity/Demand (Pushover) Seism The seismic retrofit of Ordinary,Method Recovery and CriticalManual. bridges shall be in accordance Method D2 Structure Capacity/Demand (Pushover) Method of Seism Method D2 – Structure Capacity/Demand (Pushover) Method of Seism Method D2 – Structure Capacity/Demand (Pushover) Method of Seism Manual Section 5.6. The seismic analysis need only be performed for with the requirements of the Seismic Retrofitting Manual, and WSDOT BDM Section 4.4. Manual Section 5.6. The seismic analysis need only be performed for Manual Section 5.6. The seismic analysis need only be performed for Manual Section 5.6. The seismic analysis need only be performed for (1,000 year return period) ground motions with a life safety seismic pe Specific requirements for the seismic retrofit of Recovery and Critical bridges are provided (1,000 year return period) ground motions with aa life safety seismic pe (1,000 year return period) ground motions with life safety seismic pp (1,000 year return period) ground motions with a life safety seismic level. in RFP Section 2.13. level. level. level. 4.4.2 Seismic 15.4.4.B Seismic Retrofit Design 4.4.2 Seismic Retrofit Retrofit Design Design 4.4.2 4.4.2 Seismic Seismic Retrofit Retrofit Design Design seismically deficient bridge elements have been identified, appro Table 111, Chapters 8, 9, 10, 11,Once and Appendices D thru F of the Seismic Retrofitting Once seismically deficient bridge elements have been identified, appro Once seismically deficient bridge elements have been identified, appr Once seismically deficient bridge elements have been identified, appr measures shall be selected designed. Table 1-11, Chapters 8, 9, 10 Manual shall be used in selecting and designing the seismicand retrofit measures. measures shall be selected and designed. Table 1-11, Chapters 8, 9, 10 measures shall be selected and designed. Table 1-11, Chapters 8, 9, measures shall be selected and designed. Table 1-11, Chapters 8,used 9, 10 1 Appendices D thru F of the Seismic Retrofitting Manual shall be Appendices D thru FF of the Seismic Retrofitting Manual shall be used Appendices D thru of the Seismic Retrofitting Manual shall be used Appendices D thru F of the Seismic Retrofitting Manual shall be used 15.4.4.C Earthquake Restrainers designing the seismic measures. The WSDOT Bridge and Stru designing the seismic retrofit retrofit measures. The WSDOT Bridge and Stru designing the retrofit measures. The WSDOT Bridge and Stru designing the seismic seismic retrofit measures. The WSDOT Bridge and Stru Seismic Specialist will be consulted in the selection and design of the Longitudinal restrainers shall beSeismic high strength steel rods conform to ASTM F 1554 Grade Specialist will be consulted in the selection and design of the Seismic Specialist will be consulted in the selection and design of the Seismic Specialist will be consulted in the selection and design of the retrofit measures. 105, including Supplement Requirements S2, S3 and S5. Nuts, and couplers if required, retrofit measures. retrofit measures. retrofit measures. shall conform to ASTM A 563 Grade DH. Washers shall conform to AASHTO M 293. High strength steel rods and associated couplers, nuts and washers shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with AASHTO M 232. The length of longitudinal restrainers shall be less than 24 feet.
15.4.4.D
Isolation Bearings
Isolation bearings may be used for seismic retrofit projects to reduce the demands through modification of the dynamic properties of the bridge as a viable alternative to strengthening weak elements of non-ductile bridge substructure members of existing bridge. Isolation bearings shall be designed in accordance with the requirement of the AASHTO Guide Specifications for Seismic Isolation and shall conform to Section 9.3.
Page 15-24
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.5
Concrete Structures
15.5.1
General
Chapter 15
Design of concrete structures for roadway elements such as bridges, lids, retaining walls, noise walls, three-sided structures, traffic barrier, pedestrian barrier, sign structures, and bridge approach slabs, etc., shall be based on the requirements cited herein and in the current AASHTO LRFD, AASHTO SEISMIC, WSDOT Special Provisions and the WSDOT Standard Specifications.
15.5.2
Materials 15.5.2.A
Concrete
15.5.2.A.1
Cast-in-place (CIP) Concrete
Cast-in-place (CIP) concrete shall meet the requirements of Table 15.5.2-1: Table 15.5.2-1 Component or Application Commercial Concrete; Nonstructural Concrete; Sidewalks; Curbs; Gutters General Structural Concrete including Spread Footings; Walls; Columns; Crossbeams; Box Girders; Slabs; Barriers; etc. Bridge Approach Slabs Bridge Decks Piles and Shafts Underwater Seals
15.5.2.A.2
Minimum Numerical Class and Minimum Compressive Strength at 28 days (psi) 3000
Letter Suffix
-
Compressive Strength for use in Design = f’c (psi) Numerical Class
4000
-
Numerical Class
4000 4000 4000/5000 4000
A D P W
Numerical Class Numerical Class Numerical Class 0.6 times Numerical Class
Modulus of Elasticity
For calculation of the modulus of elasticity, the unit weight of plain concrete (wc) shall be taken as 0.155 kcf for prestressed concrete girders and 0.150 kcf for normal-weight concrete unless project specific data is available. The correction factor (K1) shall be taken as 1.0 unless project specific data is available. 15.5.2.A.3
Shrinkage and Creep
Shrinkage and creep shall be calculated with relative humidity (H) taken as 75 percent unless project specific data is available. The maturity of concrete (t) shall be taken as 2000 days. In determining the age of concrete at time of load application (ti) one day of accelerated curing by steam or radiant heat shall be taken as equal to seven days of normal curing.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-25
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.5.2.A.4
Grout
Grout pads with thickness exceeding 4″ shall be reinforced with steel reinforcement. Non-shrink grout conforming to Standard Specifications Section 9-20.3(2) shall be used in keyways between prestressed concrete girders. 15.5.2.A.5
Mass Concrete
Concrete placements with a least dimension of greater than 6-feet shall be considered mass concrete, except that shafts need not be considered mass concrete. The temperature of mass concrete during placement and curing shall not exceed 160°F. The temperature difference between the geometric center of the mass concrete and the center of nearby exterior surfaces during placement and curing shall not exceed 35°F. A thermal control plan shall be submitted by the Design-Builder for review and comment for mass concrete placements. The thermal control plan may include such things as: a thermal analysis; temperature monitors and equipment; insulation; concrete cooling before placement; concrete cooling after placement, such as by means of internal cooling pipes; use of smaller, less frequent placements; or other methods proposed by the Design-Builder and accepted by the WSDOT Bridge Technical Advisor (BTA). Concrete mix designs may be optimized (such as by using low-heat cement, fly ash or slag cement, low-water/cement ratio, low cementitious materials content, larger aggregate, etc.) as long as the concrete mix meets other project requirements. 15.5.2.A.6
Shotcrete
Shotcrete shall not be used for permanent structures, including exterior wall fascia surfaces, unless allowed by RFP Criteria. Shotcrete may be used for temporary applications. 15.5.2.A.7
Lightweight Aggregate Concrete
Lightweight aggregate concrete shall not be used on bridge decks or other components exposed to traffic wheel loads in service. The absorption of the lightweight coarse aggregate for prestressed elements shall not exceed 10 percent when tested in accordance with AASHTO T85. 15.5.2.B
Reinforcing Steel
15.5.2.B.1
Grades
Steel reinforcing bars shall conform to Section 5.1.2 and Section 15.4.2.T. 15.5.2.B.2
Compressive Development Length
The minimum compressive development length shall be 1′-0″. 15.5.2.B.3
Splices
Minimum lap splice lengths, for both tension and compression, shall be 2′-0″. When two bars of different diameters are lap spliced, the length of the lap splice shall be the larger of the lap splice for the smaller bar or the development length for the larger bar.
Page 15-26
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.5.2.B.4
Chapter 15
Welded Wire Reinforcement in Prestressed Concrete Girders, Walls, Barriers and Deck Panels
Welded wire reinforcement may be used to replace steel reinforcing bars in prestressed concrete girders, walls, barriers, and deck panels. Welded wire reinforcement shall be deformed. Longitudinal wires and welds shall be excluded from regions with high shear demands, including girder webs. Longitudinal wires for anchorage of welded wire reinforcement shall have an area of 40 percent or more of the area of the wire being anchored as described in ASTM A497 but shall not be less than D4. 15.5.2.B.5
Reinforcing Bar Dowels and Resin Bonded Anchors
Allowable tensile loads and minimum required embedment for reinforcing bar dowels shall be in accordance with Section 5.5.4.A.4. If it is not possible to obtain this embedment, the allowable load on the dowel shall be reduced by the ratio of the actual embedment divided by the required embedment. Before core drilling, existing reinforcement shall be located by non-destructive methods or by chipping if existing reinforcement cannot be damaged. Core drilled holes shall be roughened. 15.5.2.C
Prestressing Steel
Prestressing steel shall be AASHTO M 203 Grade 270 low relaxation for strands and AASHTO M 275 Type II for bars. The refined estimate for computing time-dependent losses shall be used. Partial prestressing is not permitted. 15.5.2.D
Post-Tensioning Systems
Multistrand grouted tendons with steel strand systems shall be used for post-tensioned concrete bridge superstructures, spliced girders, and bridge components. For posttensioned concrete bridge decks, unbonded single strand post tensioning systems may be used. Multistrand and grouted post-tensioning systems for permanent construction shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Protection Level 2 (PL-2) practices, as defined by the requirements of PTI/ASBI M50.3-19 Specification for Multistrand and Grouted Post-Tensioning and PTI M55.1-19 Specification for Grouting of Post-Tensioned Structures. Unbonded single strand post-tensioning systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with PTI M10.2-17 Specification for Unbonded Single Strand Tendons.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-27
Chapter 15
15.5.3
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Design Considerations 15.5.3.A
Service and Fatigue Limit States
The exposure factor for AASHTO LRFD Section 5.6.7 “Control of Cracking by Distribution of Reinforcement” shall be based upon a Class 2 exposure condition. Concrete stresses in prestressed members shall be limited to the allowable stresses shown in Table 5.2.1-1. 15.5.3.B
Strength Limit State
The shear design of prestressed members shall be based on the general procedure of AASHTO LRFD Section 5.7.3.4.2. The shear design of non-prestressed members shall be based on either the general procedure, or the simplified procedure of AASHTO LRFD Section 5.7.3.4.1. AASHTO LRFD Section 5.8.3.4.3 “Simplified Procedure for Prestressed and Non-prestressed Sections” shall not be used. The maximum spacing of shear and torsion reinforcement shall be 18 inches. 15.5.3.C
Post-Tensioning
Dead end anchorages shall be avoided. A 2″ minimum clearance shall be provided between post-tensioning ducts. Confinement reinforcement shall be provided to confine curved post-tensioning tendons in accordance with Section 5.8.1.F. Structure shortening effects due to post-tensioning shall be included in the design. The camber shall be shown on the plans and shall include the effect of both dead load and final prestressing. All post-tensioning anchorages in webs of box girder or multi-stem superstructure should be vertically aligned. Tendons adjacent to post-tensioning anchorages shall meet the minimum tangent length and minimum tendon radii requirements of Section 5.8.1.D.
15.5.4
Superstructures 15.5.4.A
Reinforced Concrete Superstructures
The use of CIP reinforced concrete bridge superstructures without post-tensioning shall be restricted to widening existing reinforced concrete bridge superstructures. Longitudinal post-tensioning shall be provided for all new CIP reinforced concrete bridge superstructures. 15.5.4.B
Box Girder Superstructures
15.5.4.B.1
Intermediate Diaphragms for Curved Concrete Box Girder Bridges
Intermediate diaphragms shall be provided for curved concrete box girder bridges with centerline radius, R, less than 800 feet. Minimum diaphragm spacing shall be as follows: For 600 feet ≤ R < 800 feet - at midspan. For 400 feet ≤ R < 600 feet - at ⅓ points of span. For R < 400 feet - at ¼ points of span.
Page 15-28
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.5.4.B.2
Chapter 15
Temperature Effects
Thermal stresses shall be investigated in design using the following criteria: 1.
A mean temperature 50°F with rise 45°F and fall 45°F for longitudinal analysis using one-half of the modulus of elasticity (Maximum Seasonal Variation.)
2.
The superstructure box girder shall be designed transversely for a temperature differential between inside and outside surfaces of ±15°F with no reduction in modulus of elasticity (Maximum Daily Variation).
3.
The superstructure box girder shall be designed longitudinally for a top slab temperature increase of 20°F with no reduction in modulus of elasticity.
15.5.4.B.3
Drains
Drains shall be placed in the bottom slab at the low points of each cell. Drain hole details shall be in accordance with Figure 5.3.8-1. 15.5.4.C
Prestressed Concrete Girder Superstructures
15.5.4.C.1
WSDOT Standard Girder Types and Construction Sequences
Prestressed concrete girders shall be a WSDOT standard girder type in accordance with Bridge Standard Drawing 5.6-A1-10 through 5.6-A1-13. Prestressed concrete girder superstructures shall follow a construction sequence in accordance with Bridge Standard Drawing 5.6-A2-1 through 5.6-A2-3. 15.5.4.C.2
Superstructure Continuity
Prestressed concrete girder superstructures shall be designed for the envelope of simple span and continuous span loadings for all permanent and transient loads. Loads applied before establishing continuity (typically before placement of continuity diaphragms) need only be applied as a simple span loading. Continuity reinforcement shall be provided at supports for loads applied after establishing continuity. 15.5.4.C.3
Continuous Structure Configuration
Girder type, depth and number of lines shall be identical in adjacent spans over intermediate piers. Girder type, depth and number of lines may be changed at expansion joints. 15.5.4.C.4
Girder Ends
Prestressed concrete girders shall have a standard end type in accordance with Section 5.6.2.E. Prestressing strands at girder ends shall be extended into diaphragms and made continuous in accordance with Section 5.1.3.D. Girder end skew angles for trapezoidal tub, slab, wide flange deck, wide flange thin deck and deck bulb-tee prestressed concrete girders shall be limited to 30 degrees. Girder end skew angles for all other prestressed concrete girders shall be limited to 45 degrees. The splitting resistance of pre-tensioned anchorage zones shall be as described in AASHTO LRFD Section 5.9.4.4.1. The end vertical reinforcement shall not be larger than #5 bars and spacing shall not be less than 2½″. The remaining splitting reinforcement not fitting within the h/4 zone may be placed beyond the h/4 zone at a spacing of 2½″.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-29
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.5.4.C.5
Diaphragms
Diaphragms for prestressed concrete girder superstructures shall be cast-in-place concrete. Diaphragms shall be oriented parallel to girder support skew. On curved bridges, diaphragms shall be placed on radial lines. Intermediate and end diaphragms shall be in accordance with Bridge Standard Drawings. Except for Prestressed Concrete Wide Flange Deck Girder and Prestressed Concrete Slab Girder bridges, intermediate diaphragms shall be provided for all prestressed concrete girder bridges in the following situations:
• Spans crossing a roadway with a minimum vertical clearance of 20'-0" or less.
• Spans crossing a railway with a minimum vertical clearance of 23'-4" or less from the top of rail.
• Spans crossing a water body or waterway with a minimum vertical clearance of 6'-0" of less from the 100-year MRI water surface level.
• Spans that will possibly or likely have vehicular traffic under the span in the future with a minimum vertical clearance of 20'-0" or less. Intermediate diaphragms shall be equally spaced between bearing centerlines at a spacing not to exceed 50'. Intermediate diaphragms shall be full depth for structures crossing over roads with average daily traffic (ADT) greater than 50,000, in accordance with Section 5.6.4.C.4. 15.5.4.C.6
Barrier and Sidewalk Load Distribution
The dead load of one traffic barrier or sidewalk shall not be distributed over more than three girder webs. 15.5.4.C.7
Composite Action
Composite section properties including effective flange width of the composite deck shall be in accordance with Section 5.6.2.B. 15.5.4.C.8
Dead Loads
The bridge deck dead load to be applied to a girder shall be based on the full bridge deck thickness. The pad/haunch weight due to the maximum pad/haunch height shall be added to that load over the full length of the girder. When the depth of the pad/haunch between the top of the prestressed concrete girder and the underside of the deck at the centerline of the girder exceeds 6″, reinforcement shall be provided in the pad in accordance with Figure 5.6.4-2. 15.5.4.C.9
Girder Stirrups
Girder stirrups shall be field bent over the top mat of reinforcement in the bridge deck unless pre-bent hooks are allowed by the WSDOT standard girder type or Additional reinforcement is provided in conformance with Section 5.6.2.H.
Page 15-30
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
15.5.4.C.10 Transformed Section Properties Transformed section properties shall not be used for design of prestressed concrete girders. Gross section properties shall be used. 15.5.4.C.11 Deck Shrinkage The elastic gain in prestressing strands due to slab shrinkage shall be computed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Section 5.9.3.4.3.d. Deck shrinkage shall be considered as an external force applied to the composite section for the Service I, Service III, and Fatigue I limit states. The deck shrinkage strain shall be computed as 50-percent of the strain determined by AASHTO LRFD Equation 5.4.2.3.3-1. 15.5.4.C.12 Deck Girder Superstructures The term “deck girder” refers to a prestressed concrete girder whose top flange or surface is the driving surface, with or without an overlay, including slab and deck bulb-tee girders. Unless noted otherwise deck girders that are not connected to adjacent girders shall use a Type 1 deck protection system; girders that only have shear connections with adjacent girders shall use a Type 3 or Type 4 deck protection system; and girders that have moment connections with adjacent girders shall use Type 2 or Type 3 deck protection systems. Deck girders without a composite CIP deck slab shall have a minimum concrete cover of 2″ over the top mat. The top mat of reinforcement in the top flange shall be epoxy-coated. 15.5.4.C.13 Slab Girders Slab girder spans between centerline bearings shall be limited to the prestressed concrete girder height multiplied by 30. A minimum 5″ composite CIP bridge deck shall be placed over slab girders directly supporting traffic loadings. The CIP concrete bridge deck shall at a minimum be Class 4000D concrete with one layer of #5 epoxy coated reinforcement in both the transverse and longitudinal directions. The longitudinal reinforcement shall be spaced at 12 inches maximum and the transverse reinforcement shall be spaced at 6 inches maximum. 15.5.4.C.14 Deck Bulb-Tee Girders Deck bulb-tee girders shall be limited to pedestrian bridges, temporary bridges and to widening existing similar structures. 15.5.4.C.15 Wide Flange Deck Girders Wide flange deck girders shall be limited to pedestrian bridges, temporary bridges and to widening existing similar structures. Wide flange deck girders with mechanical connections shall have an HMA or concrete overlay. A waterproofing membrane shall be provided with an HMA overlay. Wide flange deck girders with UHPC connections shall have a 1½” concrete overlay.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-31
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.5.4.C.16 Wide Flange Thin Deck Girders Wide flange deck girders shall be limited to pedestrian bridges, temporary bridges and to widening existing similar structures. Two mats of transverse reinforcement in the CIP bridge deck shall be designed to resist live loads and superimposed dead loads using a Type 1 Deck Protection System. The longitudinal reinforcement shall be spaced at 12 inches maximum and the transverse reinforcement shall be spaced at 6 inches maximum. 15.5.4.C.17 Tub Girders Drains shall be placed in the centerline of the bottom flange at the low points of each cell. Drain hole details shall be in accordance with Bridge Standard Drawing 5.6-A9-3. 15.5.4.C.18 Spliced Prestressed Concrete Girders Closure joints shall be CIP concrete with a minimum length of 2′-0″. The sequence of placing concrete for the closure joints and deck shall be specified in the plans. Concrete cover to web stirrups at the CIP closure at pier diaphragms shall not be less than 2½″. If intermediate diaphragm locations coincide with CIP closures between precast segments, then the concrete cover at the CIP closures shall not be less than 2½″. Girders shall be post-tensioned prior to deck placement, unless otherwise noted in the RFP. Ducts for longitudinal post-tensioning shall be kept below the bridge deck.
15.5.5
Concrete Bridge Decks Concrete bridge decks shall be designed using the Traditional Design of AASHTO LRFD Section 9.7.3. For web spacing in excess of 12 feet or cantilever overhang in excess of 6 feet, transverse post-tensioning shall be provided in the deck. For structures that include sidewalks, the construction joint between the sidewalk and the deck shall be a smooth surface. Longitudinal expansion or isolation joints in bridge decks are not permitted. 15.5.5.A
Bridge Deck Requirements
The minimum bridge deck thickness shall be 5″ for slab and deck bulb-tee prestressed concrete girder superstructures, 7.5″ for other concrete superstructures, 8.0″ for steel girder superstructures, and 8.5″ (including 3.5″ stay-in-place deck panel and 5″ CIP concrete deck) for superstructures with SIP deck panels. This minimum thickness may be reduced by 0.5″ for bridges with Deck Protection Systems 2, 3 and 5. For bridge deck overhangs that support traffic barriers, the minimum thickness shall be 8”. The distance from the top of the bridge deck to the top of the girder at centerline bearing at centerline of girder is represented by the “A” Dimension. A roughened surface or a shear key shall be provided at deck construction joints.
Page 15-32
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.5.5.B
Chapter 15
Bridge Deck Reinforcement
Top transverse reinforcement shall be hooked at the deck slab edge unless a traffic barrier is not used. Longitudinal deck slab reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Section 5.7.2.B. The minimum clearance between top and bottom reinforcing mats shall be 1″. The minimum cover over the top layer of reinforcement shall be in accordance with the appropriate Deck Protection System. The minimum cover below the bottom layer reinforcement shall be 1.0″. The minimum amount of reinforcement in each direction shall be 0.18 in2/feet for the top mat and 0.27 in2/feet for the bottom mat. The maximum bar spacing in both transverse and longitudinal directions for the top mat, and transverse direction of the bottom mat shall not exceed 12″. The maximum bar spacing for the bottom longitudinal direction within the effective length, as specified in AASHTO LRFD Section 9.7.2.3, shall not exceed the deck thickness. 15.5.5.C
Stay-in-Place (SIP) Deck Panels
SIP deck panels shall be precast concrete and their details shall be in accordance with Bridge Standard Drawing 5.6-A10-1. SIP steel deck forms are not permitted. SIP deck panels shall not be used in longitudinal negative moment regions of continuous superstructures, unless the deck is longitudinally post-tensioned. For a bridge widening or phased construction, SIP deck panels shall not be used in the bay adjacent to the existing structure. SIP deck panels shall not be used on prestressed concrete girders with flanges less than 12″ wide. SIP deck panels shall not be used on steel girder bridge superstructures. 15.5.5.D
Bridge Deck Protection
All new bridge decks, precast or cast-in-place slabs, and deck girder structures shall utilize a deck protection system in accordance with this section and Section 5.7.4.A. Widening of existing bridge decks and slab bridges shall be in accordance with Section 5.7.4.B. 15.5.5.E
Bridge Deck HMA Paving
Asphalt resurfacing including bituminous surface treatment (BST) on bridge decks and slab bridges shall be in accordance with the Bridge deck Condition Report (BCR) provided for each bridge. Construction shall be in accordance with the bridge paving specifications included in the RFP.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-33
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6
Steel Structures
15.6.1
Design Considerations 15.6.1.A
Codes, Specification, and Standards
Steel highway bridges shall be designed to the following codes and specifications:
• AASHTO LRFD, latest edition
• AASHTO SEISMIC The following codes and specifications shall govern steel bridge construction:
• WSDOT Standard Specifications, latest edition
• AASHTO/AWS D1.5M/D1.5: Bridge Welding Code, latest edition 15.6.1.B
WSDOT Steel Bridge Practice
Unshored composite construction is used for plate girder and box girder bridges. Shear connectors shall be placed throughout positive and negative moment regions, for full composite behavior. A minimum of one percent longitudinal deck steel, in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Article 6.10.1.7, shall be placed in negative moment regions. For service level stiffness analysis, such as calculating live load moment envelopes, the bridge deck shall be considered composite and uncracked for the entire bridge length. For negative moment at strength limit states, the bridge deck shall be ignored while reinforcing steel is included for stress and section property calculations. Stiffeners used to connect cross frames shall be welded to top and bottom flanges. Jacking stiffeners shall be used adjacent to bearing stiffeners, on girder or diaphragm webs, in order to accommodate future bearing replacement. Coordinate jack placement in substructure and girder details. Steel framing shall consist of main girders and cross frames. Bottom lateral systems shall only be used when required for torsional stability in curved bridges and when temporary bracing is not practical. When lateral systems are used, they shall be detailed carefully for adequate fatigue life. Standard corrosion protection for steel bridges is the Standard Specifications Section 6-07 four-coat paint system west of the Cascades and where paint is required for appearance. Unpainted weathering steel shall only be used east of the Cascades. WSDOT does not allow the use of steel stay-in-place deck forms. 15.6.1.C
Preliminary Girder Proportioning
Live load deflections shall be limited in accordance with the optional criteria of AASHTO LRFD Articles 2.5.2.6.2 and 3.6.1.3.2. The superstructure depth shall be shown as the distance from the top of the bridge deck to the bottom of the web. On straight bridges, interior and exterior girders shall be designed and detailed as identical. Spacing should be such that the distribution of wheel loads on the exterior girder is close to that of the interior girder. The number of girder lines should be minimized, with a maximum spacing of 14-16 feet. Steel bridges shall be redundant, with three or more girders lines for I girders and two or more boxes for box girders, except as otherwise allowed by the RFP Criteria.
Page 15-34
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6.1.D
Chapter 15
Bridge Steels
Use AASHTO M 270/ASTM A 709 grades 50 or 50W for plate girders and box girders. Use of AASHTO M 270/ASTM A 709 Grade HPS 70W is permissible but availability is limited and shall be confirmed prior to actual use in design. AASHTO M 270 grade HPS100W may only be used if allowed by the RFP Criteria. For wide flange beams, use AASHTO M 270/ASTM A 709 Grade 50S or ASTM A 992. For ancillary members such as expansion joint headers, utility brackets, bearing components or small quantities of tees, channels, and angles, ASTM M 270/ASTM A 709 bridge steels are acceptable but are not required. In these cases, equivalent ASTM designated steels may be used. All main load-carrying members or components subject to tensile stress shall be identified in the plans and shall meet the minimum Charpy V-notch (CVN) fracture toughness values as specified in AASHTO LRFD Table 6.6.2-2, temperature zone 2. Fracture critical members or components shall also be designated in the plans. Structural tubes and pipes are not considered prequalified under the Bridge Welding Code. They are covered under the Structural Welding Code AWS D1.1. Structural tubing ASTM A 500 shall not be used for dynamic loading applications. ASTM A 1085 is a newer cold formed and welded HSS section specification that is a Gr 50 steel. Supplements for heat treating and CVNs are included and may also be specified. CVN tests are typically performed in the flats of the HSS square or rectangular tube sections. CVN values in the bend radius of the tubes may be lower than values obtained in the flats, however recent informational testing has shown the CVN values in the corners meet or exceeds the requirements for Fractured Critical Member steels in temperature zone 2. Heat treating of the sections can improve the values, but no data is currently available. ASTM A 1085 shall not be specified for dynamic loading applications until further data is available. Availability and minimum tonnage or bundle quantity orders shall be investigated prior to specifying ASTM A 1085. 15.6.1.E
Plate Sizes
Plate thicknesses of less than 5/16 inches shall not be used for bridge applications. 15.6.1.F
Fasteners
All bolted connections shall be friction type (slip-critical). Assume Class B faying surfaces where inorganic zinc primer is used. General Guidelines for Steel Bolts 15.6.1.F.1
ASTM F 3125 GR A325 & GR F1852
High strength steel, headed bolts for use in structural joints. These bolts may be hot-dip galvanized in accordance with ASTM F2329 or mechanically galvanized in accordance with ASTM B695 – Class 55. Do not specify for anchor bolts. Galvanized GR F1852 “Twist-Off” style bolts are not permitted on WSDOT structures. 15.6.1.F.2
A449
High strength steel bolts and studs for general applications including anchor bolts. Recommended for use where strengths equivalent to ASTM F3125 GR A325 bolts (up to 1” diameter) are desired but custom geometry or lengths are required. These bolts may be hot-dip galvanized. Do not use these as anchor bolts for seismic applications due to low CVN impact toughness. WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-35
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6.1.F.3
F1554 - Grade 105
Higher strength anchor bolts to be used for larger sizes (1½″ to 4″). When used in seismic applications, specify supplemental CVN requirement S4 with a test temperature of -20°F. Lower grades may also be suitable for sign structure foundations. This specification shall be used for seismic restrainer rods, and may be galvanized. The equivalent AASHTO M 314 shall not be specified as it does not include the CVN supplemental requirements. 15.6.1.F.4
ASTM F3125 GR A490 & GR F2280
High strength alloy steel, headed bolts for use in structural joints. These bolts shall not be hot dip galvanized, because of the high susceptibility to hydrogen embrittlement. In lieu of galvanizing, the application of an approved zinc rich paint may be specified. Other coating applications are available and are specified in ASTM F3125. Alternate coatings shall be approved by the WSDOT Bridge Design Engineer prior to their use. Do not specify for anchor bolts. Only uncoated GR F2280 “Twist-Off” bolts are permitted on WSDOT structures. 15.6.1.F.5
A354 - Grade BD
High strength alloy steel bolts and studs. These are suitable for anchor bolts where strengths equal to ASTM F 3125 GR A490 bolts are desired. These bolts shall not be hot dip galvanized. If used in seismic applications, specify minimum CVN toughness of 25 feet-lb at 40°F.
15.6.2
Girder Bridges 15.6.2.A
Tub or Box Girders
Steel box girders shall be trapezoidal tub sections. Tub girders will be referred to herein as box girders, as in AASHTO LRFD Article 6.11. A top lateral system shall be placed inside the girder and shall be treated as an equivalent plate for design, closing the open section and providing torsional stiffness until the bridge deck is fully cured. Stability of the shape shall be ensured for all stages of construction in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Article 6.11.3. Box girder bridges with a multiple box girder cross section shall have a single bearing per box. For bridges of a single box girder cross section, two bearings per box shall be used. Plate diaphragms with access holes shall be used in place of pier cross frames. With the exception of effects from inclined webs, top flanges and webs shall be designed as if they were part of individual I-girders. In order to maximize web spacing while minimizing bottom flange width, place webs out of plumb on a slope of 1 in 4. When required to stiffen bottom flanges in compression tee sections shall be used for longitudinal stiffeners. Channel bracing may be used at cross frame locations for transverse stiffeners. Bottom flange stiffeners shall be terminated at field splices. Otherwise, carefully ground weld terminations are required in tension regions with high stress range. Stiffener plates shall be welded across the bottom flange at cross frame locations, and shall not be combined with web vertical stiffeners.
Page 15-36
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6.2.B
Chapter 15
Fracture Critical Superstructures
Non-redundant, fracture critical single tub superstructures, and twin I-girder systems, may only be considered if allowed by RFP Criteria. UBIT access or some form of permanent false decking or other inspection access is required for fracture critical inspections. The maximum roadway width for either a single box or twin I-girder superstructure is 27 feet. Where roadway width exceeds 27 feet, additional webs/girders shall be used. Mainline structures exceeding 38 feet in width shall use four webs/girders minimum. Increased vertical clearance from mainline traffic shall be provided for either of these bridge types. The minimum is 20 feet. The web depths may be reduced below AASHTO LRFD Table 2.5.2.6.3-1 minimums provided live load deflection criteria are met. However, web depth less than 5′-0″ is not permitted. The limit state load modifier relating to redundancy, ηr = 1.05, as specified in AASHTO LRFD Section 1.3.4, shall be used in the design of non-redundant steel structures. For load rating non-redundant bridges, a system factor of 0.85 is required in the AASHTO Manual for Bridge Evaluation (MBE) on the axial and flexural capacity of the girders. The girder design shall satisfy both the AASHTO LRFD code and the MBE. The AASHTO LRFD approximate live load distribution factors are not applicable to these girder types. The level rule or the preferred refined analysis shall be used. Where highly curved, only a refined analysis shall be used. Fracture-critical members and system redundant members shall be designed for infinite fatigue life, which requires design using the Fatigue I load combination specified in AASHTO LRFD Table 3.4.1-1 and the nominal fatigue resistance specified in Article 6.6.1.2.5.
15.6.3
Design of I-Girders 15.6.3.A
Limit States for AASHTO LRFD
The fatigue live load specified in AASHTO LRFD Article 3.6.1.4 shall be used for checking girder details in accordance with article 6.6. It is generally possible to meet the constant amplitude fatigue limit (CAFL) requirement for details with good fatigue performance. Limiting the calculated fatigue range to the CAFL ensures infinite fatigue life. Webs shall be checked for fatigue loading in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Article 6.10.5.3, using the calculated fatigue stress range for flexure or shear. Flanges and webs shall meet strength limit state requirements for both construction and final phases. Pier cross frames shall be designed for seismic loading, extreme event load combination. Bolts shall be treated as bearing type connections with AASHTO LRFD Article 6.5.4.2 resistance factors. The resistance factor for all other members is 1.0 at extreme limit state. 15.6.3.B
Composite Section
Live load plus impact shall be applied to the transformed composite section using Es/Ec, commonly denoted n. Long-term loading (dead load of barriers, signs, luminaries, overlays, etc.) shall be applied to the transformed composite section using 3n. Positive moments are applied to these composite sections accordingly; both for service and strength limit states. The bridge deck may be considered effective in negative moment regions provided tensile stresses in the deck are below the modulus of rupture. This is generally possible for Service I load combination and fatigue analysis. For strength limit state loadings, the composite section includes longitudinal reinforcing while the bridge deck is ignored. WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-37
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6.3.C
Flanges
The maximum flange thickness is 3-inches. All plates for flange material 2” or less shall be purchased such that the ratio of reduction of thickness from a slab to plate shall be at least 3.0:1. Plates for flange material greater than 2″ thick shall be supplied based on acceptable ultrasonic testing (UT) inspection in accordance with ASTM A 578. UT scanning and acceptance shall be as follows:
• The entire plate shall be scanned in accordance with ASTM A 578 and shall meet Acceptance Standard C, and
• Plate material within 12-inches of flange complete joint penetration splice welds shall be scanned in accordance with ASTM A 578 Supplementary S1 and shall meet Acceptance Standard C 15.6.3.D
Webs
If different web thickness is needed, the transition shall be at a welded splice. Horizontal web splices shall not be used unless web height exceeds 12′-6″. All welded web splices on exterior faces of exterior girders and in tension zones elsewhere shall be ground smooth. Web splices of interior girders need not be ground in compression zones. 15.6.3.E
Transverse Stiffeners
Transverse stiffeners shall be used in pairs at cross frame locations on interior girders and on the inside of webs of exterior girders. They shall be welded to the top flange, bottom flange and web at these locations. This detail is considered fatigue category C’ for longitudinal flange stress. Stiffeners used between cross frames shall be located on one side of the web, welded to the compression flange, and cut short of the tension flange. Stiffeners located between cross frames in regions of stress reversal shall be welded to one side of the web and cut short of both flanges. Alternatively, they may be welded to both flanges if fatigue Category C’ is checked. Stiffened webs require end panels to anchor the first tension field. The jacking stiffener to bearing stiffeners space shall not be used as the anchor panel. The first transverse stiffener shall be placed at no greater spacing than 1.5 times the web depth from the bearing or jacking stiffener. 15.6.3.F
Longitudinal Stiffeners
Longitudinal stiffeners may be used in long spans where web depths exceed 10 feet in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Article 6.10.11.3. Weld terminations for longitudinal stiffeners are fatigue prone details and shall be detailed accordingly. Longitudinal stiffener plates shall be continuous, splices being made with full penetration welds before being attached to webs. Transverse stiffeners shall be pieced to allow passage of longitudinal stiffeners. 15.6.3.G
Bearing Stiffeners
Bearing stiffeners shall be vertical under total dead load. Pier cross frames may transfer large seismic lateral loads through top and bottom connections. Weld size shall be designed to ensure adequate load path from deck and cross frames into bearings. Page 15-38
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6.3.H
Chapter 15
Cross Frames
Cross frames and connections shall be detailed for repetitive fabrication, adjustment in the field, and openness for inspection and painting. Cross frames consisting of back-toback angles separated by gusset plates are not permitted. Cross frames are generally patterned as K-frames or as X-frames. Oversize holes will not be allowed in cross frame connections if girders are curved. Intermediate cross frames for straight girders with little or no skew shall be designed as secondary members. Member sizes shall be selected to meet minimum slenderness requirements and design connections only for anticipated loads, not for 75 percent strength of member. Cross frames shall be installed parallel to piers for skew angles of 0 degrees to 20 degrees. For greater skew angles, other arrangements may be used. Cross frames for curved girder bridges are main load carrying members and tension components shall be so designated in the plans. Web stiffeners at cross frames shall be welded to top and bottom flanges. Refer to BDM Section 6.3.8 for guidance on design and detailing of cross frames. 15.6.3.I
Bottom Laterals
In accordance with Section 6.1.2, bottom lateral systems shall be avoided except when required for stability in curved bridges and shall be used only when temporary bracing is not practical. Where lateral gusset plates are fillet welded to girder webs, the fatigue stress range in the girder is limited to Category E without transition radius or Category D with carefully made transition radius. The gusset plates shall be bolted to the girder web in regions of high tension stress range. 15.6.3.J
Bolted Field Splice for Girders
Field splices shall be bolted. Bolted web splices shall not involve thin fill material. Thickness transitions for webs, if needed, shall be done with welded shop splices. Fillers used in bolted splices shall be developed as specified in AASHTO LRFD Article 6.13.6.1.4. Splice bolts shall be checked for Strength load combinations and slip at Service II load combination. When faying surfaces are blasted and primed with inorganic zinc paint, a Class B surface condition shall be assumed. 15.6.3.K
Camber
Camber shall include effects of profile grade, superelevation, anticipated dead load deflections, and bridge deck shrinkage (if measurable). Permanent girder deflections shall be shown in the plans in the form of camber diagrams and tables. Dead load deflections are due to steel self-weight, bridge deck dead load, and superimposed dead loads such as overlay, sidewalks, and barriers. A constant distance from top of web to top of bridge deck shall be assumed for design, however forms and haunch height shall be adjusted to meet bridge deck thickness and profile as specified in Standard Specifications Section 6-03.3(39). Two camber curves are required, one for total dead load plus bridge deck formwork and one for steel framing self-weight. The difference between these curves is used to set bridge deck forms.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-39
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Girder self-weight shall include the basic section plus stiffeners, cross frames, welds, shear studs, etc. These items may be accounted for by adding an appropriate percentage of basic section weight. Total dead load camber shall consist of deflection due to: 1.
Steel weight, applied to steel section. Include 10 psf bridge deck formwork allowance in the total dead load camber, but not in the steel weight camber. The effect of removing formwork is small in relation to first placement, due to composite action between girders and bridge deck. It isn’t necessary to account for the removal.
2.
Bridge deck weight, applied to steel section.
3.
Traffic barriers, sidewalks, and overlays, applied to long-term composite section using 3n. Do not include weight of future overlays in the camber calculations.
4.
Bridge deck shrinkage (if ≥ ¾″).
Traffic barriers, sidewalks, overlays, and other items constructed after the bridge deck placement shall be analyzed as if applied to the long-term composite section full length of the bridge. The modulus of elasticity of the bridge deck concrete shall be reduced to one third of its short term value. For bridge deck shrinkage calculation, apply a shrinkage strain of 0.0002 to the long-term composite section using 3n. In addition to girder deflections, girder rotations at bearing stiffeners shall be shown. Camber tolerance is governed by the Bridge Welding Code AWS D1.5, Chapter 3.5. A note of clarification shall be added to the plan camber diagram: “For the purpose of measuring camber tolerance during shop assembly, assume top flanges are embedded in concrete without a designed haunch.” This allows a high or low deviation from the theoretical curve, otherwise no negative camber tolerance is allowed. A screed adjustment diagram shall be included with the camber diagram. This diagram, with dimension table, shall be the remaining calculated deflection just prior to bridge deck placement, taking into account the estimated weight of deck formwork and deck reinforcing. The weight of bridge deck formwork may be taken equal to 10 psf, or the assumed formwork weight used to calculate total camber. The weight of reinforcing may be taken as the span average distributed uniformly. The screed adjustment should equal: (Total Camber – Steel Camber) - (deflection due to forms + rebar). The screed adjustment shall be shown at each girder line. This will indicate how much deflection and twisting is anticipated during bridge deck placement, primarily due to span curvature and/or skew. These adjustments shall be applied to theoretical profile grades, regardless of actual steel framing elevations. The adjustments shall be designated “C”. The diagram shall be designated as “Screed Setting Adjustment Diagram.” The table of dimensions shall be kept separate from the girder camber, but at consistent locations along girders. That is, at 1/10th points or panel points. A cross section view shall be included with curved span bridges, showing effects of twisting. For the purpose of setting bridge deck soffit elevations, a correction shall be made to the plan haunch dimension based on the difference between theoretical flange locations and actual profiled elevations. The presence of bridge deck formwork shall be noted at the time of the survey. The presence of false decking need not be accounted for in design or the survey.
Page 15-40
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6.3.L
Chapter 15
Bridge Deck Placement Sequence
The bridge deck shall be placed in a prescribed sequence allowing the concrete in each segment to shrink with minor influence on other segments. Negative moment regions (segments over interior piers) shall be placed after positive moment regions have had time to cure. Successive segments shall not be placed until previous segments attain sufficient strength. The designer shall check bridge deck tensile stresses imposed on adjoining span segments. 15.6.3.M
Bridge Bearings for Steel Girders
Make bearing selection consistent with required motions and capacities. 15.6.3.N
Surface Roughness and Hardness
The standard measure of surface roughness is the microinch value. Surface roughness shall be shown on the plans for all surfaces for which machining is required unless covered by the Standard Specifications or Special Provisions. Surface hardness of thermal cut girder flanges is also controlled. 15.6.3.O
Welding
The minimum fillet weld size shall be as shown in the following table. Weld size is determined by the thicker of the two parts joined unless a larger size is required by calculated stress. The weld size need not exceed the thickness of the thinner part joined. Base Metal Thickness of Thicker Part Joined To ¾″ inclusive Over ¾″
15.6.3.P
Minimum Size of Fillet Weld ¼″ 5/16″
Shop Assembly
For straight girders, a progressive longitudinal shop assembly shall be performed to ensure proper fit of subsections, field splices, and cross frame connections, etc., in the field. Progressive transverse assembly, in combination with progressive longitudinal assembly shall be performed for bridges with horizontal curvature or skews greater than 20-degrees. For transverse assembly, specify all cross frame and pier diaphragm connections to be completed while assembled. During shop assembly, girder segments shall be blocked or supported in the no-load condition (no gravity effects). For curved I-girders, cross frames shall be fabricated to fit the no-load condition. Design of cross frames and pier diaphragms shall take into account twist and rotations of webs during construction. This situation should be carefully studied by finite element analysis to determine amount and type of movement anticipated during construction. Unlike curved girders rotating away from plumb at midspan, girder webs for skewed construction shall be kept plumb at piers. For bridges with skews greater than 20-degrees, the fit of girder segments, cross frames, and pier diaphragms shall be carefully analyzed during design to select the proper fit condition, which shall be either the no-load condition of the steel dead load condition. The detailing, fabrication, and shop assembly shall be specified to match the condition used in the analysis and design.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-41
Chapter 15
15.6.4
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Plan Details 15.6.4.A
General
Detailing practice shall follow industry standards. Designations for structural steel can be found in AISC Detailing for Steel Construction. Detailing shall also conform to national unified guidelines published by AASHTO/NSBA Steel Bridge Collaboration. Connections in the field shall be bolted. Cross frame members may be shop bolted or welded assemblies and shall be shipped to the field in one unit. Connections of bolted cross frame assemblies shall be fully tensioned prior to shipping. Cross frame assemblies shall be field bolted to girders during erection. 15.6.4.B
Framing Plan
The Framing Plan shall show ties between the survey line, girder lines, backs of pavement seats, and centerlines of piers. Locate panel points (cross frame locations). Provide geometry, bearing lines, and transverse intermediate stiffener locations. Show field splice locations. Map out different lateral connection details. 15.6.4.C
Girder Elevation
The Girder Elevation is used to define flanges, webs, and their splice locations. Show shear connector spacing, location, and number across the flange. Show shear connector locations on flange splice plates or specifically call out when no connectors are required on splice plates. Locate transverse stiffeners and show where they are cut short of tension flanges. Show the tension regions of the girders with a V for the purpose of ordering plate material, inspection methods (NDE), and Bridge Welding Code acceptance criteria. Identify tension welded butt splices for which radiographic examination (RT) is required. Permissible welded web splices shall be shown. If there are fracture critical components, they shall be clearly identified as FCM. If a member is identified as fracture critical with an “FCM” symbol, it is not necessary to also call the plate or member with a “V” for Charpy-V-Notch as this is covered with the “FCM” designation. 15.6.4.D
Typical Girder Details
Specific sheets shall be devoted to showing typical details to be used throughout the girders. Such details include the weld details, various stiffener plates and weld connections, locations of optional web splices, and drip plate details. Field splices for flanges shall accommodate web location tolerance of ± ¼″ in accordance with the AWS Bridge Welding Code 5.5. Allow a minimum of ¼″ for out of position web plus ⅜″ for fillet weld, or a total of ⅝″ minimum clear between theoretical face of web and edge of splice plate. The bottom flange splice plate shall be split to allow moisture to drain (use 4 equal bottom flange splice plates). The fill plate does not need to be split. Vertical stiffeners used to connect cross frames shall be welded to top and bottom flanges to reduce out-of-plane bending of the web. All stiffeners shall be coped, clipped (or cut short in the case of transverse stiffeners without cross frames) a distance between 4tw and 6tw to provide web flexibility, in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Article 6.10.11.1.1.
Page 15-42
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.6.4.E
Chapter 15
Cross Frame Details
Show member sizes, geometrics (work lines and work points), and connection details. Double angles shall not be used for cross frames. Cross frames shall be complete subassemblies for field installation. Internal cross frames and top lateral systems for box girders are shop welded, primarily. All connection types shall be closely examined for detail conflict and weld access. Clearance between bridge deck forming and top lateral members shall be considered. 15.6.4.F
Camber Diagram and Bearing Stiffener Rotation
Camber curves shall be detailed to provide dimensions at tenth points. Dimensions may also be given at cross frame locations. In order to place bearing stiffeners in the vertical position after bridge deck placement, show expected girder rotations at piers. Show deflection camber only. Geometric camber for profile grade and superelevation will be calculated by the shop detailer from highway alignment shown on the Layout sheets. A separate diagram and table, with bridge cross section, shall be included to show how elevations at edges of deck can be determined just before concrete placement. This will give adjustments to add to profile grades, based on remaining dead load deflections, with deck formwork and reinforcing being present. 15.6.4.G
Bridge Deck
New bridge decks for steel I-girders or box girders shall use Deck Protection System 1. The bridge deck shall be detailed in section and plan views. The current WSDOT policy requires one percent minimum steel be provided for the entire length of the bridge so typically only one section view is required for single or continuous spans. The pad dimension is assumed to be constant throughout the span length. Ideally, the girder is cambered to compensate for dead loads and vertical curves. However, fabrication and erection tolerances result in considerable deviation from theoretical elevations. The pad dimension is therefore considered only a nominal value and is adjusted as needed along the span once the steel has been erected and profiled. The screed for the slab is to be set to produce correct roadway profile. The plans shall reference this procedure contained in Standard Specifications Section 6-03.3(39). The pad dimension is to be noted as nominal. 15.6.4.H
Handrail Details, Inspection Lighting, and Access
When required by the RFP Criteria, include handrails with typical girder details. Locations may be adjusted to avoid conflicts with other details such as large gusset plates. Box girders require special consideration for inspection access. Access holes or hatches shall be detailed to exclude birds and the public. They shall be positioned where ladders can be used to gain access. Locate hatches in girder webs at abutments. Provide for round trip access and penetrations at all intermediate diaphragms. Access for removing bridge deck formwork shall be provided. Box girders shall have electrical, inspection lighting, and ventilation details for the aid of inspection and maintenance. Refer to the Design Manual Chapter 1040 for bridge inspection lighting requirements.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-43
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
To facilitate inspection, interior paint shall be SAE AMS Standard 595 color number 17925 (white). One-way inspection of all interior spaces shall be made possible by round trip in adjoining girders. This requires some form of walkway between boxes and hatch operation from both sides. If locks are needed, they must be keyed to one master. Air vents shall be placed along girder webs to allow fresh air to circulate. 15.6.4.I
Box Girder Details
Provide a top lateral system in each box, full length of a girder. The top laterals shall be bolted directly to the top flange or intermediate bolted gusset plate (in which case, the lateral members may be welded to the gusset plate). In order to maximize the clearance for deck forms, all lateral connections shall progress down from the bottom surface of the top flange. The haunch distance between top of web and deck soffit shall be 6″ or greater to allow deck forming to clear top lateral members. To facilitate continuous welding of the bottom flange to webs, the stiffeners shall be held back and attached to the bottom flange by a member brought in after the bottom longitudinal welds are complete. The offset between center of web and edge of bottom flange shall be 2″ Use tee shapes, either singly or in pairs, for stiffening wide bottom flanges. Box girder inside clear height shall be 5 feet or more to provide reasonable inspection access. Less than 5 feet inside clear height is not be permitted. Drain holes shall be installed at all low points. Geometrics for boxes shall be referenced to a single workline, unless box width tapers. The box cross section remains tied to a centerline intersecting this workline and normal to the bridge deck. The section rotates with superelevation transition rather than warping.
15.6.5
Painting of Existing Steel Bridges Refer to Section 6.6 for requirements and procedures associated with painting of existing steel bridges.
15.6.6
Corrosion of Steel Foundations and Buired Structures Refer to Section 6.7 for corrosion and abrasion protection requirements to ensure a minimum 75-year design life for steel foundation elements and metal plate buried structures.
Page 15-44
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7
Substructure Design
15.7.1
General Substructure Considerations 15.7.1.A
Chapter 15
Foundation Seals
The top of seal, if used, shall be no higher than the total scour at scour check flood. 15.7.1.B
Scour
Requirements from Section 7.1.7 shall be followed. The hydraulic engineer of record replaces the Hydraulic Office where mentioned. 15.7.1.C
Combination of Extreme Event Effects
15.7.1.C.1
Downdrag
Seismic soil liquefaction induced downdrag forces shall be included in the Extreme Event I limit state. Downdrag loads may be decoupled from the inertial and overstrength load effects. 15.7.1.C.2
Lateral Ground Displacement
Where lateral ground displacement (e.g. lateral spreading and lateral flow) is expected, the ground displacement may be decoupled from the inertial and overstrength load effects. See WSDOT Geotechnical Design Manual Sections 6.4.2.7 and 6.5.4 for additional guidance on combining loads when lateral ground displacement occurs. 15.7.1.C.3
Scour
The effects of local scour shall be combined with earthquake loading. At the Extreme Event I limit state, the design shall consider a scour depth equal to 50 percent of the total scour at scour design flood depth.
15.7.2
Foundation Modeling for Seismic Loads 15.7.2.A
General
Bridge modeling for seismic events shall be in accordance with requirements of the AASHTO SEISMIC Section 5. If liquefaction is a design condition, the bridge shall be analyzed using both the static and liquefied soil conditions in accordance with AASHTO SEISMIC Section 6.8. 15.7.2.B
Bridge Model Section Properties
In general, gross section properties may be assumed for all members, except concrete columns and other ductile reinforced concrete members. Seismic response analysis for deep foundations shall be based on a bracketed approach using a stiff substructure response and a soft substructure response. 15.7.2.B.1
Cracked Properties for Columns
Effective section properties shall be in accordance with the AASHTO SEISMIC Section 5.6.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-45
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7.2.B.2
Shaft Properties
The shaft concrete strength and construction methods lead to significant variation in shaft stiffness described as follows: For a stiff substructure response: 1.
Use ƒ′c to calculate the modulus of elasticity.
2.
Use Ig based on the maximum oversized shaft diameter allowed by Standard Specifications Section 6-19.
3.
When permanent casing is used, increase shaft Ig using the transformed area of the casing.
For a soft substructure response: 1.
Use ƒ′c to calculate the modulus of elasticity.
2.
Use Ig based on the nominal shaft diameter. Alternatively, Ie may be used when it is reflective of the actual load effects in the shaft.
3.
When permanent casing is used, increase shaft Ig using the transformed area of the casing.
15.7.2.B.3
Cast-in-Place Pile Properties
For a stiff substructure response: 1.
Use 1.5 ƒ′c to calculate the modulus of elasticity.
2.
Use the pile Ig plus the transformed casing moment of inertia.
For a soft substructure response: 1.
Use 1.0 ƒ′c to calculate the modulus of elasticity.
2.
Use pile Ig, neglecting casing properties.
15.7.2.C
Spread Footing Modeling Methods
The method for calculating footing springs is given in Section 7.2.7. 15.7.2.D
Deep Foundation Modeling Methods
The method used to model deep foundations shall conform to AASHTO SEISMIC Section 5.3. 15.7.2.D.1
Group Effects
The reduction factors for lateral resistance due to the interaction of deep foundation members is provided in AASHTO SEISMIC Section 8.12.2.5. 15.7.2.D.2
Shaft Caps and Pile Footings
In areas prone to scour or lateral spreading, the passive resistance of caps and pilesupported footings shall be neglected.
Page 15-46
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7.2.E
Chapter 15
Design of Deep Foundations for Lateral Forces
15.7.2.E.1
Determination of Tip Elevations
A parametric study or analysis shall be performed to evaluate the sensitivity of the depth of the shaft or pile to the ground level displacement of the structure in order to determine the depth required for stable, proportionate lateral response of the structure. 15.7.2.E.2
Design for Lateral Loads
The structural design of shafts and piles shall consider the following conditions at the applicable limit state:
15.7.3
1.
Static soil properties with both stiff and soft shaft or pile properties.
2.
Dynamic or degraded soil properties with both stiff and soft shaft or pile properties.
3.
Liquefied soil properties with both stiff and soft shaft or pile properties. When lateral spreading is possible, additional loading conditions will need to be analyzed.
4.
Scour condition with stiff and soft shaft or pile properties.
Column Design 15.7.3.A
Shear Design
At Strength limit states, shear design shall follow the “Simplified Procedure for Nonprestressed Sections” in AASHTO LRFD Section 5.7.3.4.1. 15.7.3.B
Column Silos
Due to the construction and inspection complications of column silos, the Design-Builder shall attempt to meet balanced stiffness and frame geometry requirements by the other methods suggested in Section 4.1.4 of the AASHTO SEISMIC prior to use of column silos. Column silos shall meet the requirements of Section 7.3.4. 15.7.3.C
Longitudinal Reinforcement
The maximum reinforcement ratio shall be 0.04 in SDCs A, B, C and D. The minimum reinforcement ratio shall be 0.007 for SDC A, B, and C and shall be 0.01 for SDC D. For bridges in SDC A, if oversized columns are used for architectural reasons, the minimum reinforcement ratio of the gross section may be reduced to 0.005, provided all loads can be carried on a reduced section with similar shape and the reinforcement ratio of the reduced section is equal to or greater than 0.01 and 0.133ƒ′c/ƒy. The column dimensions are to be reduced by the same ratio to obtain the similar shape. The reinforcement shall be evenly distributed and symmetric within the column. 15.7.3.D
Longitudinal Reinforcement Splices
No splices are allowed when the required length of longitudinal reinforcement is less than the conventional mill length of 60-feet. Splicing of longitudinal reinforcement shall be outside the plastic hinge regions. But in SDC A, splices need only be located a minimum of 1.5 times the column diameter from the top and bottom of the column. For bridges in SDC A and SDC B, no lap splices shall be used for #14 or #18 bars (such splices shall be mechanical splices conforming to Standard Specifications Section 6-02.3(24)C). Either lap or mechanical splices may be used for #11 bars and smaller. WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-47
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Lap splices shall be detailed as Class B splices. The spacing of transverse reinforcement over the length of a lap splice shall not exceed 4-inches or one-quarter of the minimum member dimension. For bridges in SDC C and SDC D, bars shall be spliced using mechanical splices conforming to Standard Specifications Section 6-02.3(24)F. Splices shall be staggered. The distance between splices of adjacent bars shall be greater than the maximum of 20-bar diameters or 24-inches. 15.7.3.E
Longitudinal Reinforcement Development
15.7.3.E.1
Crossbeams
Development of longitudinal reinforcement shall be in accordance with AASHTO SEISMIC Section 8.8.4. Column longitudinal reinforcement shall be extended into crossbeams as close as practicably possible to the opposite face of the crossbeam. 15.7.3.E.2
Footings
Longitudinal reinforcement at the bottom of a column should extend into the footing and rest on the bottom mat of footing reinforcement with standard 90 degree hooks. In addition, development of longitudinal reinforcement shall be in accordance with AASHTO SEISMIC Section 8.8.4 and AASHTO LRFD Section 5.10.8.2.1. 15.7.3.E.3
Drilled Shafts
Embedment shall be specified using TRAC Report WA-RD 417.1 titled “Noncontact Lap Splices in Bridge Column-Shaft Connections”. The requirements of the AASHTO SEISMIC Section 8.8.10 for development length of column bars extended into oversized pile shafts for SDC C and D shall not be used. The modification factor in AASHTO LRFD Section 5.10.8.2.1 that allows ld to be decreased by the ratio of (As required)/(As provided), shall not be used. 15.7.3.F
Transverse Reinforcement
15.7.3.F.1
General
All transverse reinforcement in columns shall be deformed. Columns in SDC A and B may use spirals, circular hoops, or rectangular hoops and crossties. Columns in SDC C and D shall use circular hoop reinforcement. However, rectangular hoops with ties may be used when large, odd shaped column sections are required. 15.7.3.F.2
Spiral Splices and Hoops
Welded laps shall be used for splicing and terminating spirals. Spirals or butt-welded hoops are required within plastic hinge regions. Splices shall be staggered. Also, where interlocking hoops are used in rectangular or non- circular columns, the splices shall be located in the column interior. Circular hoops for columns shall be shop fabricated using a manual direct butt weld or resistance butt weld. Field welded splices and termination welds of spirals of any size bar are not permitted in the plastic hinge region, including a zone extending 2’-0” into the connected member.
Page 15-48
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7.3.G
Chapter 15
Reduced Column Section
Columns with overstrength force reducing details shall be designed in accordance with Section 7.3.7.
15.7.4
Crossbeam Two-stage integral non-prestressed crossbeams shall be designed in accordance with Section 7.4.1.
15.7.5
Abutment Design and Details 15.7.5.A
General
15.7.5.A.1
Bent-Type and Isolated Abutments
Bent-type and isolated abutments shall be designed in accordance with Section 7.5.1. 15.7.5.A.2
Abutments on Structural Earth (SE) Walls and Geosynthetic Walls
Bridge abutments may be supported on structural earth walls and geosynthetic walls. Abutments supported on these walls shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this RFP and the following documents (listed in order of importance):
• BDM Section 7.5.2
• WSDOT Geotechnical Design Manual Section 15.5.3.5
• AASHTO LRFD
• Design and Construction of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes, Volume I and II, FHWA-NHI-10-024, FHWA-NHI-10-025 Walls directly supporting bridge abutment spread footings shall be 30 feet or less in total height, measured from the top of the fascia leveling pad to the bottom of the bridge abutment footing. Fall protection or security fencing shall be required at the top of the wall when the wall supports a spread footing abutment. Structural Earth Walls shall follow the requirements in Section 15.8.1.E. 15.7.5.B
Embankment and Backfill
15.7.5.B.1
General Clearances
The minimum clearances for the embankment at the front face of abutments shall be as indicated on Standard Plans A-50.10.00 through A-50.40.00. The minimum clearance between the bottom of the superstructure and the embankment below shall be 3’-0” for girder bridges and 5’-0” for non-girder, slab, and box girder bridges. 15.7.5.B.2
Abutments on SE Walls and Geosynthetic Walls
Clearances around bridge abutments shall be provided as shown in Figure 7.5.2-3. Concrete slope protection shall be provided.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-49
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7.5.B.3
Drainage and Backfill
3″ diameter weep holes shall be provided in all bridge abutment walls. These shall be located 6″ above the finish ground line at 12′ on center. In cases where the vertical distance between the top of the footing and the finish groundline is greater than 10′, additional weep holes shall be provided 6″ above the top of the footing. Gravel backfill for walls shall be provided behind all bridge abutments. A 3′ width of gravel backfill shall be provided behind the cantilever wing walls. An underdrain pipe and gravel backfill for drain shall be provided behind all bridge abutments except abutments on fills with a stem wall height of 5′ or less. 15.7.5.C
Abutment Loading
15.7.5.C.1
Earthquake Load
EQ For bearing pressure and abutment stability checks, the seismic inertial force of the abutment, PIR, shall be combined with the seismic lateral earth pressure force, PAE, as described in AASHTO LRFD Section 11.6.5.1. For structural design of the abutment, the seismic inertial force, PIR, shall be combined with the seismic lateral earth pressure force, PAE, as described in AASHTO LRFD Section 11.65.1 for stability checks. 15.7.5.C.2
Bearing Forces
TU For strength design, the bearing shear forces shall be based on ½ of the annual temperature range. 15.7.5.D
Abutment Details
15.7.5.D.1
Bearing Seats
The bearing seats shall have a minimum edge dimension of 3″ from the bearings shall and satisfy the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Section 4.7.4.4. On L abutments, the bearing seat shall be sloped away from the bearings to prevent ponding at the bearings. 15.7.5.D.2
Transverse Girder Stops
All superstructures shall be restrained against lateral displacement at the abutments and intermediate expansion piers. All prestressed girder bridges in Western Washington (within and west of the Cascade mountain range) shall have girder stops between all girders at abutments and intermediate expansion piers. Girder stops shall be full width between girder flanges except to accommodate bearing replacement requirements as specified in Chapter 9. Girder stops are designed using a shear strength resistance factor shall be ϕs = 0.9. 15.7.5.D.3
Abutment Walls
When construction joints are located in the middle of the abutment wall, a pour strip or an architectural reveal should be used for a clean appearance. AASHTO LRFD Section 5.10.6 shall be followed for temperature and shrinkage reinforcement requirements near concrete surfaces exposed to daily temperature changes and in structural mass concrete. The minimum cross tie reinforcement in abutment walls shall be #4 tie bars with 135° hooks, spaced at approximately 2′-0″ center-to-center vertically and horizontally. Page 15-50
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7.6
Chapter 15
Abutment Wing Walls and Curtain Walls Wall footing thickness shall not be less than 1’-6”
15.7.7
Footing Design 15.7.7.A
General Footing Criteria
See Figure 7.7.1-1 for footing cover requirements. Footings supported on SE walls or geosynthetic walls shall have a minimum of 6″ of cover. 15.7.7.B
Spread Footing Design
15.7.7.B.1 1.
Foundation Design
Bearing Stress The maximum effective width for calculating uniform bearing stress is limited to C+2D as shown in Figure 7.7.4-3.
15.7.7.B.2
Structural Design
1.
Footing Thickness and Shear The minimum footing thickness shall be 1′-0″. The minimum plan dimension shall be 4′-0″.
2.
Vertical Reinforcement Vertical reinforcement shall be developed into the footing to adequately transfer loads to the footing. Vertical rebar shall be bent 90° and extend to the top of the bottom mat of footing reinforcement. Bars in tension shall be developed using 1.25 Ld. Bars in compression shall develop a length of 1.25 Ld, prior to the bend. Where bars are not fully stressed, lengths may be reduced in proportion, but shall not be less than ¾ Ld.
3.
Bottom Reinforcement Reinforcement shall not be less than #6 bars at 12″ centers to account for uneven soil conditions and shrinkage stresses.
4.
Top Reinforcement Top reinforcement for footings designed for two-way action shall not be less than #6 bars at 12″ centers, in each direction while top reinforcement for bearing wall designed for one-way action shall not be less than #5 bars at 12″ centers in each direction.
15.7.7.C
Pile-Supported Footing Design
The minimum footing thickness shall be 2′-0″. The minimum plan dimension shall be 4′-0. 15.7.7.C.1
Pile Embedment, Clearance, and Rebar Mat Location
Cast-in-place concrete piles with reinforcing extending into footings are embedded a minimum of 6″. The clearance for the bottom mat of footing reinforcement shall be 1½″ between the reinforcing and the top of the pile for CIP pile footings. See Figure 7.7.5-2 for the minimum pile clearance to the edge of footing.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-51
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7.7.C.2
Concrete Design
In determining the proportion of pile load to be used for calculation of shear stress on the footing, any pile with its center 6″ or more outside the critical section shall be taken as fully acting on that section. Any pile with its center 6″ or more inside the critical section shall be taken as not acting for that section. For locations in between, the pile load acting shall be proportioned between these two extremes.
15.7.8
Shafts 15.7.8.A 1.
Axial Resistance Axial Resistance Group Reduction Factors The group reduction factors for axial resistance of shafts for the strength and extreme event limit states shall be taken as shown in Table 7.8.1-1. These reduction factors presume that good shaft installation practices are used to minimize or eliminate the relaxation of the soil between shafts and caving. If this cannot be adequately controlled due to difficult soils conditions or for other constructability reasons, lower group reduction factors shall be used as recommended by the Geotechnical Engineer of record. These group reduction factors apply to both strength and extreme event limit states. For the service limit state the influence of the group on settlement as required in the AASHTO LRFD and the AASHTO SEISMIC are still applicable.
2.
15.7.8.B
Shafts with permanent casing, installed by drilling and not driven, require reduced side resistance specified by the Geotechnical Engineer. Side resistance shall be limited to 10 percent of the nominal (ultimate) side resistance unless otherwise approved by the WSDOT State Geotechnical Engineer. Structural Design and Detailing
1.
For shaft foundation supporting columns in SDC C or D, the shaft nominal moment capacity shall be designed to resist 1.25 times the moment demand generated in the shaft by the overstrength column plastic hinge moment at the base of the column.
2.
Concrete Class 5000P shall be specified for the entire length of the shaft for wet or dry conditions of placement.
3.
When shafts are constructed in water, the concrete specified for the casing shoring seal shall be Class 4000W.
4.
The assumed concrete compressive strength may be taken as 0.85ƒ′c for structural design of shafts. For seismic design, the expected compressive strength may be increased by 1.3 in accordance with AASHTO Seismic Section 8.4.4.
5.
The presence of permanent steel casing shall be taken into account in the shaft design (i.e. for stiffness, and etc.), but the structural capacity of permanent steel casing shall not be considered for structural design of drilled shafts unless the design conforms to Section 15.7.10.
6.
Minimum cover requirements shall be as specified below:
• Diameter less than or equal to 3′-0″ = 3″
• Diameter greater than 3′-0″ and less than 5′-0″ = 4″
• Diameter greater than or equal to 5′-0″ = 6″
Page 15-52
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
7.
The clear spacing between spirals and hoops shall not be less than 6″ or more than 9″. The clear spacing between spirals or hoops may be reduced in the splice zone in single column/single shaft connections if the concrete is vibrated.
8.
The volumetric ratio and spacing requirements of the AASHTO SEISMIC for confinement need not be met.
9.
#7 through #9 welded lap spliced hoops are acceptable to use provided they are not located in possible plastic hinge regions. Welded splices in hoops for shafts shall be completed prior to assembly of the shaft steel reinforcing cage. When hoops are used, the plans shall show a staggered splice pattern around the perimeter of the shaft so that no two adjacent splices are located at the same location.
10. In single column/single shaft configurations, the spacing of the shaft transverse reinforcement in the splice zone shall meet the requirements of the TRAC Report titled, “Noncontact Lap Splices in Bridge Column-Shaft Connections”. The factor k represents the ratio of column tensile reinforcement to total column reinforcement at the nominal resistance. In the upper half of the splice zone, k shall be taken as 1.0. In the lower half of the splice zone, this ration could be determined from a column moment-curvature analysis. 11. Longitudinal reinforcement shall be provided for the full length of drilled shafts. The minimum longitudinal reinforcement in the splice zone of single column/single shaft connections shall be the larger of 0.75 percent Ag of the shaft or 1.0 percent Ag of the attached column. The minimum longitudinal reinforcement beyond the splice zone shall be 0.75 percent Ag of the shaft. The minimum longitudinal reinforcement in shafts without single column/single shaft connections shall be 0.75 percent Ag of the shaft. 12. The clear spacing between longitudinal reinforcement shall not be less than 6″ or more than 9″. If a shaft design is unable to meet this minimum requirement, a larger diameter shaft shall be considered. 13. Mechanical splices in longitudinal bars shall be placed in low stress regions and staggered 2′-0″ minimum. 14. Where undersized permanent slip casing is used, provide a minimum of concrete cover of 3″ for shafts with a diameter of 4′-0″ and larger and 1½″ for shafts with a diameter less than 4′-0″. 15. Reinforcing bar centralizers shall be detailed in the plans as shown in Section 7.8.2-4.
15.7.9
Piles and Piling 15.7.9.A
Pile Types
Piles for new permanent bridges shall be CIP concrete piles, precast, prestressed concrete piles, structural steel pipe piles, structural steel H piles, CFSTs, or RCFSTs. Precast, prestressed concrete piles shall only be used in SDC A or B. Steel H piles shall only be used at bridge abutments, and the connections into the cap shall develop the strength required for design and to prevent pull out during uplift.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-53
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.7.9.B
Pile Groups
The minimum center-to-center spacing of piles shall be 30″ or 2.5 pile diameters. 15.7.9.C
Battered Piles
Battered piles shall not be used to resist lateral loads for permanent bridge foundations. 15.7.9.D
Structural Design and Detailing of CIP Concrete Piles
1.
Concrete Class 5000P shall be specified for CIP concrete piles. The top 10′ of concrete in the pile shall be vibrated.
2.
For structural design, the reinforcement alone shall be designed to resist the total moment throughout the length of pile without considering strength of the steel casing. The minimum reinforcement shall be 0.75 percent Ag for SDC B, C and D and shall be provided for the full length of the pile. Minimum clearance between longitudinal bars shall meet the requirements in Appendix 5.1-A2.
3.
If the pile to footing/cap connection is not a plastic hinge zone longitudinal reinforcement need only extend above the pile into the footing/cap a distance equal to 1.0 ld (tension). If the pile to footing/cap connection is a plastic hinge zone longitudinal reinforcement shall extend above the pile into the footing/cap a distance equal to 1.25 ld.
4.
Transverse spiral reinforcement shall be designed to resist the maximum shear in the pile. The minimum spiral shall be a #4 bar at 9″ pitch. If the pile to footing/cap connection is not a plastic hinge zone the volumetric requirements of AASHTO LRFD Section 5.11.4.5 need not be met.
15.7.9.E
Structural Steel Pipe Piles
Structural steel pipe piles shall follow the current Special Provisions in addition to the requirement in the Standard Specifications. Additionally, the design wall thickness shall be reduced for corrosion over a 75-year minimum design life. Minimum corrosion rates are specified in Section 6.7.1. 15.7.9.F
Pile Resistance
The bridge plans shall include the Ultimate Bearing Capacity (Nominal Driving Resistance, Rndr, for driven piles) in tons as shown in Figure 7.9.11-1.
15.7.10
Concrete-Filled Steel Tubes
15.7.10.A Design Requirements Concrete-filled steel tubes (CFST), reinforced concrete-filled steel tubes (RCFST) and their connections shall be designed in accordance with Section 7.10. The use of CFST and RCFST requires approval from the WSDOT Bridge Design Engineer when used as a ductile element as part of an earthquake-resisting system. Additionally, the plastic hinge modeling parameters and methods must be approved by the WSDOT Bridge Design Engineer.
Page 15-54
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.8
Walls and Buried Structures
15.8.1
Retaining Walls 15.8.1.A
Chapter 15
General
Design of retaining walls shall be based on the requirements and guidance cited herein and in the current AASHTO LRFD, AASHTO SEISMIC, WSDOT General & Bridge Special Provisions and the Standard Specifications M 41-10 unless otherwise cited herein. Retaining walls and their components that are in service for a maximum of 36 months are considered to be temporary. Temporary retaining walls need not be designed for the Extreme Event Limit States. 15.8.1.B
Loads
Retaining walls and their components shall be designed for all applicable loads defined in the current AASHTO LRFD Chapter 3. The live load factor for Extreme Event-I Limit State load combination, γEQ as specified in the AASHTO LRFD Table 3.4.1-1 for all permanent retaining walls shall be taken equal to 0.50. 15.8.1.C
Design of Reinforced Concrete Cantilever Retaining Walls
15.8.1.C.1
Standard Plan Reinforced Concrete Cantilever Retaining Walls
The standard plan reinforced concrete retaining walls have been designed in accordance with the requirements of the AASHTO LRFD, 4th Edition, 2007, and interims through 2008. See Section 8.1 for a complete list of the design criteria used for these walls. Details for construction and the maximum bearing pressure in the soil are given in the Standard Plans Section D. 15.8.1.C.2
Non-Standard Reinforced Concrete Retaining Walls
Reinforced concrete retaining walls containing design parameters which exceed those used in the standard reinforced concrete retaining wall design are considered to be non-standard. For additional design criteria, refer to Section 8.1.4.B 15.8.1.D
Design of Cantilever Soldier Pile and Soldier Pile Tieback Walls
Typical soldier pile wall details are provided in the Appendix 8.1-A1. 15.8.1.D.1
Ground Anchors (Tiebacks)
Either the “tributary area method” or the “hinge method” as outlined in AASHTO LRFD Section C11.9.5.1 shall be considered acceptable design procedures to determine the horizontal anchor design force. The recommended factored design load of the anchor, recommended anchor installation angles (typically 10° – 45°), no load zone dimensions, and any other special requirements for wall stability shall be as provided by the geotechnical investigation performed for the project by the Geotechnical Engineer of record, and the associated geotechnical report based on that investigation.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-55
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
The minimum vertical anchor spacing shall be the same as defined in AASHTO LRFD Section 11.9.4.2 for the minimum horizontal anchor spacing. The anchor lock-off load is 60 percent of the controlling factored design load for temporary and permanent walls (see Geotechnical Design Manual Chapter 15). Permanent ground anchors shall have double corrosion protection consisting of an encapsulation-protected tendon bond length as specified in the WSDOT General Special Provisions. Typical permanent ground anchor details are provided in the Bridge Standard Drawings 8.1-A3. Temporary ground anchors may have either double corrosion protection consisting of an encapsulation-protected tendon bond length or simple corrosion protection consisting of grout-protected tendon bond length. 15.8.1.D.2
Design of Soldier Pile
Refer to Section 8.1.5.B for design criteria 15.8.1.D.3
Design of Lagging
If construction operations are likely to occur above and behind the soldier pile wall alignment, the lagging shall be designed for an additional 250 psf surcharge due to temporary construction load. 1.
Temporary Timber Lagging Temporary lagging is as defined in the Standard Specifications Section 616.3(6). Temporary timber lagging shall be designed in accordance with Standard Specifications Section 616.3(6)B.
2.
Permanent Lagging Permanent lagging is as defined in the Standard Specifications Section 6.16.3(6). Permanent lagging shall be designed for 100 percent of the lateral load that could occur during the life of the wall in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Sections 11.8.5.2 and 11.8.6 for simple spans without soil arching. Timber lagging shall be designed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Section 8.6. The size effect factor (CFb) shall be considered 1.0 unless a specific size is shown in the wall plans. The wet service factor (CMb) shall be 0.85. The load applied to lagging shall be applied at the critical depth. Lagging size may be stepped over the height of the wall. Timber lagging designed as a permanent structural element shall consist of treated Douglas Fir-Larch, grade No. 2 or better. Hem-fir wood species, due to the inadequate durability in wet condition, shall not be used for permanent timber lagging.
15.8.1.D.4
Design of Fascia Panels
Refer to Section 8.1.5D for design criteria. Use of shotcrete in lieu of cast-in-place conventional concrete for the soldier pile fascia shall require the approval of the WSDOT State Bridge and Structures Engineer.
Page 15-56
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.8.1.E
Chapter 15
Design of Structural Earth Walls
15.8.1.E.1
Pre-approved Proprietary Structural Earth Walls
Structural earth (SE) wall systems meeting established WSDOT design and performance criteria have been listed as “preapproved” by the Bridge and Structures Office and the Materials Laboratory Geotechnical Branch. A list of current preapproved proprietary wall systems and their limitations is provided in the Geotechnical Design Manual Appendix 15D. For the SE wall shop drawing review procedure, see the Geotechnical Design Manual Chapter 15. Refer to Section 8.1.6 for additional design criteria. 15.8.1.F
Design of Standard Plan Geosynthetic Walls
Details for construction are given in the Standard Plans Section D. 15.8.1.G
Design of Soil Nail Walls
Soil nail walls shall be designed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Section 11.12. The seismic design parameters shall be determined in accordance with the most current edition of the AASHTO SEISMIC. Typical soil nail wall details are provided in Section 8.1. 15.8.1.H
Scour of Retaining Walls
Refer to Section 8.1.10 for design criteria. 15.8.1.I
Miscellaneous Items
Refer to Section 8.1.11 for design criteria.
15.8.2
Noise Barrier Walls 15.8.2.A
General
Design of noise barrier walls shall be based on the requirements and guidance cited herein and in the current AASHTO LRFD, AASHTO SEISMIC, AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications, WSDOT General & Bridge Special Provisions and the Standard Specifications M 41-10 unless otherwise cited herein. Acceptance by the State Bridge and Structures Architect shall be required on all noise barrier wall aesthetics, including finishes, materials, configuration, and top of wall profile. 15.8.2.B
Loads
Noise barrier walls and their components shall be designed for all applicable loads defined in the current AASHTO LRFD Chapter 3. Wind loads and on noise barriers shall be as specified in Chapter 3. Seismic load shall be as follows: See Section 8.2.2 for seismic loads. 15.8.2.C
Design
15.8.2.C.1
Standard Plan Noise Barrier Walls
Refer to Section 8.2.3.A for design criteria.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-57
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.8.2.C.2
Non-Standard Noise Barrier Walls
Noise barrier walls containing design parameters which exceed those used in the standard noise barrier wall design are considered to be non-standard. 1.
Noise Barrier Walls on Bridges and Retaining Walls Refer to Section 8.2.3B1 for design criteria.
15.8.3
Buried Structures 15.8.3.A
General Policy
Cast-in-place or precast reinforced concrete, composite concrete filled arch, and metal structural plate are authorized materials for Buried Structures as defined in Section 8.3. If a Design-Builder intends to use alternate materials, other than reinforced concrete, composite concrete filled arch, or metal structural plate, they shall submit an Alternative Technical Concept. All Buried Structures shall be designed for a minimum service life of 75 years. The Structural Clear Span, Structure Class, and Fill Depth for Buried Structures shall be as defined in Section 8.3.1. Buried Structures conveying vehicles, or pedestrians shall consider the applicability of safety systems such as, but not limited to, fire life-safety elements, ventilation, lighting, emergency egress, traffic control, and communications in accordance with Section 8.3.8. 15.8.3.B
General Design Requirements
The design of Buried Structures shall be in accordance with the requirements and guidance cited herein and in the current AASHTO LRFD, AASHTO SEISMIC, the WSDOT Geotechnical Design Manual, and Standard Specifications, unless otherwise required in the project-specific criteria. Rigid Class 2 Buried Structures comprising composite concrete filled arch, cast-in-place and precast reinforced concrete arch, box, split box, and three-sided structures shall be designed for seismic effects in accordance with Section 8.3.3.H, and load rated in accordance with Section 13. Seismic design shall not apply for Class 1 Buried Structures, and flexible Class 2 Buried Structures comprising metal structural plate, pipes, arches, and boxes, except when the structure crosses an active fault. 15.8.3.C
Application of Loads
Buried Structures shall be designed for force effects in accordance with AASHTO LRFD, Section 12.6.1, except exemption from seismic loading shall not apply for rigid Class 2 Buried Structures. The requirement of Section 3.5 for inclusion of live load in the Extreme Event I Load Combination is applicable. The load factor γEQ as specified in AASHTO LRFD Table 3.4.1-1 shall be taken equal to 0.50, regardless of location or congestion. The decrease in live load effect due to increase in Fill Depth, or distribution of wheel load through earth fill shall be considered in both design and load rating of Buried Structures with Fill Depths of 2 feet or greater.
Page 15-58
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
Where the fill depth is less than 2 feet, live load shall be distributed directly to the top of the Buried Structure, and the effects of live load distribution through the Fill Depth shall be ignored. The effects of live load may be neglected for;
• A simple span (single barrel) Buried Structure, when the Structural Clear Span is less than or equal to 24.0 feet, and the minimum Fill Depth exceeds 13.0 feet.
• A simple span (single barrel) Buried Structure, when the Structural Clear Span exceeds 24.0 feet, and the minimum Fill Depth exceeds the Structural Clear Span.
• A multiple span (multiple barrel) Buried Structure when the Fill Depth exceeds the Structural Clear Span. Headwalls, wingwalls, and railings shall be designed for vehicular collision and pedestrian or worker fall protection forces where applicable in accordance with Section 10.2 and Section 10.5. 15.8.3.D
Scour
Buried Structures, wingwalls, headwalls, and respective foundations shall be designed for the effects of scour as described in Section 7.1.7 and Section 8.1.10. 15.8.3.E
Corrosion
Consideration shall be given to the degradation of Buried Structure materials resulting from corrosive conditions as defined in Section 6.7. For metal structural plate structures, minimum corrosion rates and design service life analysis shall be in accordance with Section 6.7.2. For concrete structures, corrosion resistant reinforcement as defined in Section 5.1.2 shall be used in Marine or Non-Marine: Corrosive environments. The minimum cover requirements for direct exposure to salt water and coastal situations of the AASHTO LRFD shall apply. 15.8.3.F
Fall Protection
Fall protection shall be provided on headwalls and wingwalls in accordance with Section 8.1.11.B for exposed wall heights of 4.0 feet or more. For fall protection features that are exposed to the public, design of railings shall be in accordance with Chapter 13 of the AASHTO LRFD. 15.8.3.G
W-Beam Guardrail on Low Fill Buried Structures (TL-3)
When Standard Plan C-20.41 guardrail is attached to a Buried Structure, the top slab and adjacent joints shall be designed for the following:
• A minimum equivalent static lateral force of 10.0 kips
• The force shall be distributed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD, Figure A13.4.3.1-1.
• The center of the guardrail post shall be located a minimum of 18.0 inches away from any concrete edge, including but not limited to edges of block-outs, shear keys, and keyways. For details see Standard Plan C-20.41 and the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01. The configuration shown in the Standard Plan was crash tested in 2011 by the Texas A&M Transportation Institute (TTI) following the MASH Test 3.11 specifications and reported under the Roadside Safety Research Program Pooled Fund Study No. TPF-5(114), Test Report No. 405160-23-2. WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-59
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.8.3.H
Deflection
Concrete structures with less than 2.0 feet of Fill Depth shall mitigate differential deflection between adjacent units in accordance with Section 8.3.5.A.2. 15.8.3.I
Control of Cracking
Reinforcement provided in accordance with AASHTO LRFD, Section 5.6.7 shall be based upon a Class 2 exposure condition. 15.8.3.J
Joints
Joints shall be designed to carry the applied horizontal and vertical forces resulting from, but not limited to, differential settlement between segments, live load deflection, and shear transfer. Joints shall be so formed that they can be assembled to transmit those forces and provide joint tightness consistent with tolerances outlined in the Contract Documents. Each joint shall be sealed to prevent exfiltration or infiltration of soil fines and/or water. 15.8.3.K
Deck Protection and Approach Slabs
When the top of a concrete Buried Structure is directly exposed to vehicular traffic, a concrete or HMA overlay, or reinforced concrete deck shall be provided. When the Fill Depth of the Buried Structure is less than 2.0 feet at any point, all reinforcement in the top slab shall be corrosion resistant as defined in Section 5.1.2. Reinforcement in the top slab need not be corrosion resistant, when a 5.0-inch minimum composite, cast-in-place concrete topping, meeting the requirements for a Type 4 Bridge Protection System in accordance with Section 5.7.4 is provided. When an HMA overlay is provided, a waterproofing membrane in accordance with Standard Specifications Section 6-08 shall be installed. If Base Course is placed between the top slab and HMA, the waterproofing membrane may be omitted. Bridge approach slabs shall be provided in accordance with Section 10.6. 15.8.3.L
Metal Structural Plate Structures
Design and construction of metal structural plate structures shall conform to the AASHTO LRFD, Section 12, and the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications, Section 26. Steel structural plate shall not be used in locations conforming to Marine or Non-Marine: Corrosive environments as defined in Section 6.7.1 of this Bridge Design Manual. Minimum backfill cover over the top of the Buried Structure shall be in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD. Where aluminum will contact concrete or grout, two coats of paint shall be applied to the aluminum at the contact surface in accordance with Standard Specifications Section 7-08.3(2)D. 15.8.3.M
Design of Detention Vaults
Design of completely enclosed buried detention vaults shall not be permitted. Refer to Section 8.3.7 for design criteria specific to detention vaults. 15.8.3.N
Design of Tunnels
Refer to Section 8.3.8 for design criteria specific to tunnels. Page 15-60
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.9
Bearings and Expansion Joints
15.9.1
Expansion Joints 15.9.1.A
Chapter 15
General Considerations
Bridges shall be designed to accommodate movements from all sources, including thermal fluctuations, concrete shrinkage, prestressing creep, and elastic post-tensioning shortening. Where seismic isolation bearings are used, expansion joints shall be designed to accommodate seismic movements in order to allow the isolation bearings to function properly. Expansion joints shall be designed to accommodate movement while minimizing imposition of secondary stresses in the structure. Expansion joint systems shall be sealed to prevent water, salt, and debris infiltration to substructure elements below. They shall also be designed to maximize durability while providing a relatively smooth riding surface. Semi-integral construction shall be subject to the bridge length limitations stipulated below. In semi-integral construction, concrete end diaphragms are cast monolithically with the bridge deck. Girders are supported on elastomeric bearings, which are supported on a stub or cantilever abutment. Approach slab anchors, in conjunction with a compression seal, shall connect the monolithic end diaphragm to the bridge approach slab. 15.9.1.A.1
Concrete Bridges
Semi-integral construction shall be used for prestressed concrete girder bridges under 450 feet long and for post-tensioned spliced concrete girder and cast-in-place posttensioned concrete box girder bridges under 400 feet long. Stub “L” and cantilever “L” type abutments with expansion joints at the bridge ends shall be used where bridge length exceeds these values. 15.9.1.A.2
Steel Bridges
“L” type abutments shall be used with expansion joints at the ends for multiple span bridges. The use of intermediate expansion joints shall be avoided wherever possible. For the purposes of this section, expansion joints are broadly classified into three categories based upon their total movement range as follows: Small Movement Range Joints		 Medium Movement Range Joints		 Large Movement Range Joints		 15.9.1.B
Total Movement Range <= 1¾ inch 1¾ inch < Total Movement Range < 5 inch Total Movement Range >= 5 inch
General Design Criteria
Expansion joints and bearings shall be designed interdependently and in conjunction with the anticipated behavior of the overall structure. Shrinkage and uniform thermal variation movements shall be calculated as follows:
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-61
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.9.1.B.1
Shrinkage Effects
The shrinkage strain used for sizing expansion joints that are installed 30 to 60 days following concrete deck placement shall be no less than 0.0002. This value shall be corrected for restraint conditions imposed by various superstructure types as follows: ∆shrink= β × µ × Ltrib Where: Ltrib β µ
15.9.1.B.2
(9.1.2-1)
= Tributary length of the structure subject to shrinkage = Ultimate shrinkage strain after expansion joint installation; estimated as 0.0002 in lieu of more refined calculations = Restraint factor accounting for the restraining effect imposed by superstructure elements installed before the concrete slab is cast 0.0 for steel girders, 0.5 for precast prestressed concrete girders, 0.8 for concrete box girders and T-beams, 1.0 for concrete flat slabs
Thermal Effects
Uniform thermal movement range shall be calculated using the maximum and minimum anticipated bridge superstructure average temperatures in accordance with AASHTO LRFD BDS Article 3.12.2.1 Procedure A. Most of western Washington shall be classified as a moderate climate. Eastern Washington and higher elevation areas of western Washington having more than 14 days per year with an average temperature below 32°F shall be classified as a cold climate. Factored thermal effects shall be calculated using the load factors stipulated in AASHTO LRFD BDS Article 3.4. Total unfactored uniform thermal movement range shall be calculated as: Dtemp = α × Ltrib × δT
(9.1.2-2)
Where: Ltrib = Tributary length of the structure subject to thermal variation α = Coefficient of thermal expansion; 0.000006 in./in./°F for concrete and 0.0000065 in./ in./°F for steel δT		 Bridge superstructure average temperature range as a function of bridge type and climate as determined using AASHTO BDS Article 3.12.2.1 Procedure A
In accordance with Standard Specifications M 41-10, contract drawings shall state dimensions at a normal temperature of 64°F unless specifically noted otherwise. Construction and fabrication activities at structure average temperatures other than 64°F require the Contractor or fabricator to adjust lengths of structural elements and concrete forms accordingly. Strip seal and modular expansion joint systems are typically installed in preformed concrete blockouts after the bridge deck concrete has been cast. In these instances, concrete shall be placed in the blockout with the expansion joint device set at a gap that corresponds to the temperature of the already constructed bridge deck at the time concrete is placed in the blockout. In order to accomplish this, expansion device gap settings shall be specified on the contract drawings as a function of superstructure ambient average temperature. Generally, these settings shall be specified for temperatures of 40°F, 64°F, and 80°F.
Page 15-62
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.9.1.C
Chapter 15
Small Movement Range Joints
Elastomeric compression seals shall be used for all small movement range applications for new bridges. Elastomeric compression seals or poured silicone sealant may be used for rehabilitation of existing small movement range expansion joints and widenings. 15.9.1.C.1
Compression Seals
Compression seals shall be designed and installed to effectively seal a joint against all water and debris infiltration. Compression seals shall extend continuously across the full roadway width and up into traffic barriers. No field splices of compression seals are allowed. Compression seals shall be installed against smooth, straight vertical concrete faces. Concrete surfaces may be either formed or sawcut. Polyester or elastomeric concrete nosing material shall be used for rehabilitation of existing compression seal joints in accordance with Section 15.9.1.3C below. For design purposes, the minimum and maximum working widths of the seal shall be 40 percent and 85 percent of the uncompressed width. These measurements are taken perpendicular to the joint axis. Compressed seal width at the normal construction temperature of 64°F may be taken as 60 percent of the seal’s uncompressed width. For skewed joints, bridge deck movements shall be separated into components perpendicular and parallel to the joint axis. Shear displacement of the seal over the full expected temperature range shall be limited to 22 percent of its uncompressed width. 15.9.1.C.2
Rapid-Cure Silicone Sealants
Rapid-cure silicone sealants may be installed against either concrete or steel. Concrete or steel substrate surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned before the sealant is installed. Rapid-cure silicone sealants shall be designed and installed based upon the manufacturer’s recommendations. 15.9.1.C.3
Asphaltic Plug Joints
Asphaltic plug joints are not allowed. 15.9.1.C.4
Headers
Expansion joint headers for new construction shall be the same class structural concrete as used for the bridge deck and shall be cast integrally with the deck. Expansion joint headers installed as part of a rehabilitative and/or overlay project shall be either polyester concrete or elastomeric concrete. Expansion joint headers shall be in accordance with General Special Provisions in the RFP Appendix. Concrete headers shall be constructed on each side of an expansion joint when an HMA overlay is installed atop an existing concrete bridge deck. For bridge overlays, modified concrete overlay (MCO) material may provide rigid side support for an elastomeric compression seal or a rapid cure silicone sealant bead without the need for separately constructed elastomeric concrete or polyester concrete headers. Such modified concrete overlay headers may utilize welded wire fabric as reinforcement.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-63
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.9.1.D
Medium Movement Range Joints
15.9.1.D.1
Steel Sliding Plate Joints
Steel sliding plates shall be limited to the following specific applications: 1.
sidewalks and crosswalks
2.
modular expansion joint upturns at traffic barriers
3.
bridge deck applications involving unusual movements (translation and large rotations) not readily accommodated by modular expansion joints.
All applications subject to pedestrian traffic shall meet ADA requirements and shall include a non-skid surface. Non-pedestrian traffic applications shall be galvanized or painted to provide corrosion resistance. 15.9.1.D.2
Strip Seal Joints
An elastomeric strip seal expansion joint shall consist of a preformed elastomeric gland mechanically locked into steel edge rails embedded into the concrete deck on each side of an expansion joint gap. Unfolding of the elastomeric seal accommodates movement. Edge rails shall be anchored to the concrete deck. The system shall be designed and detailed to accommodate the replacement of damaged or worn seals with minimal traffic disruption. Either a standard anchorage or a special anchorage may be used for a strip seal expansion joint. The special anchorage incorporates steel reinforcement bar loops welded to intermittent steel plates, which in turn are welded to the steel shape. The special anchorage shall be used for very high traffic volumes or applications subject to snowplow hits. In applications highly susceptible to snowplow hits and concomitant damage, the intermittent steel plates shall be detailed to protrude ¼″ above the bridge deck surface to launch the snowplow blade and prevent it from catching on the forward extrusion. The standard anchorage requires a minimum 7 inch deep block out. The special anchorage requires a minimum 9 inch deep block out. 15.9.1.D.3
Bolt-down Panel Joints
Bolt-down panel joints are not allowed. On bridge overlay and expansion joint rehabilitation projects, existing bolt-down panel joints shall be replaced with rapid-cure silicone sealant joints or strip seal expansion joints. 15.9.1.E
Large Movement Range Joints
15.9.1.E.1
Steel Finger Joints
Steel finger joints may only be used where modular expansion joints are incapable of accommodating the movements or are otherwise not feasible. Elastomeric or metal troughs shall be installed beneath steel finger joints to catch and redirect runoff water. The steel fingers shall be designed to support traffic loads with sufficient stiffness to preclude excessive vibration. In addition to longitudinal movement, finger joints shall accommodate rotation and differential vertical deflection across the joint. Finger joints shall be fabricated with a slight downward taper toward the ends of the fingers in order to minimize potential for snowplow blade damage.
Page 15-64
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.9.1.E.2
Chapter 15
Modular Expansion Joints
Modular expansion joints shall provide watertight wheel load transfer across expansion joint openings. Modular expansion joints are generally shipped in a completely assembled configuration. Modular expansion joints longer than 40 feet. may be shipped in segments to accommodate construction staging and/or shipping constraints. 1.
Operational Characteristics Modular expansion joints shall comprise a series of steel center beams oriented parallel to the expansion joint axis. Elastomeric strip seals or box-type seals shall attach to adjacent center beams, preventing infiltration of water and debris. The center beams shall be supported on support bars, which span in the primary direction of anticipated movement. The support bars shall be supported on sliding bearings mounted within support boxes. Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) - stainless steel interfaces shall be used between elastomeric support bearings and support bars. Modular expansion joint systems shall meet the fatigue resistance characterization requirements specified in the Special Provision for modular expansion joints at time of contract award. Center beam field splices shall be carefully designed and constructed to mitigate fatigue susceptibility in accordance with the Special Provisions.
2.
Movement Design Modular expansion joints shall be sized to accommodate 115 percent of calculated total movement range. Contemporary modular expansion joints permit approximately 3 inches of service movement per elastomeric seal element. Extreme event movement ranges of up to 5 inches per elastomeric seal element are allowed provided that support bars and support boxes are sized and detailed to accommodate the larger cumulative movement without structurally damaging the modular expansion joint or detaching any elastomeric strip seal elements. To minimize impact and wear on bearing elements, the maximum gap between adjacent center beams shall be limited to 3½ inch. To facilitate the installation of a modular joint at temperatures other than the 64°F normal temperature, the plans shall specify expansion gap distances face-to-face of edge beams as a function of the superstructure temperature at the time of installation.
3.
Review of Shop Drawings and Structural Design Calculations Modular expansion joints shall be designed, tested, fabricated, QA\QC inspected, and installed in accordance with the General Special Provision in the RFP Appendix, including submittal of design calculations, fatigue testing results, weld procedures, and shop drawings. The expansion joint system shall be designed to ensure complete concrete consolidation underneath all support boxes. A minimum vertical clearance of 2 inches shall be provided between the bottom of each support box and the top of the concrete block out. Alternatively, when vertical clearance is minimal, grout pads may be placed underneath support boxes before casting the concrete within the blockout.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-65
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
4.
Construction Considerations Temperature adjustment devices shall be removed as soon as possible after concrete placement in the block out.
15.9.2
Bearings 15.9.2.A
General Considerations
Bearings and expansion joints shall be designed interdependently and in conjunction with the anticipated behavior of the overall structure. 15.9.2.B
Force Considerations
Bridge bearings shall be designed to transfer all anticipated loads from the superstructure to the substructure. Bearing design calculations shall be based upon the relevant load combinations and load factors stipulated in the AASHTO LRFD. Impact need not be applied to live load forces in the design of bearings. 15.9.2.C
Movement Considerations
The movement restrictions imposed by a bearing shall be compatible with the movements allowed by an adjacent expansion joint. Both bearings and expansion joints shall be designed consistent with the anticipated load and deformation behavior of the overall structure. Design rotations shall be calculated as follows: 15.9.2.C.1
Elastomeric and Fabric Pad Bearings
The maximum service limit state rotation for bearings that do not have the potential to achieve hard contact between metal components shall be taken as the sum of unfactored dead and live load rotations plus an allowance for fabrication and construction uncertainties of 0.005 radians. 15.9.2.C.2
HLMR Bearings
High-load multi-rotational (HLMR) bearings include spherical bearings, disc bearings, cylindrical bearings and pot bearings. Both service and strength limit state rotations shall be used in the design of HLMR bearings. These rotations shall be shown on the plans to allow the manufacturer to properly design and detail a bearing. Deformable elements such as polyether urethane discs and PTFE shall be designed for service limit state loads and rotations. The service limit state rotation shall include an allowance for uncertainties of ±0.005 radians. The maximum strength limit state rotation shall be used to assure that potential hard contact (metal-to-metal or metal-to-concrete) is prevented. For disc bearings, the strength limit state rotation shall include an allowance of ±0.005 radians for uncertainties. For other HLMR bearings the strength limit state rotation shall include an allowance of ±0.005 radians for fabrication and installation tolerances and an additional allowance of ±0.005 radians for uncertainties in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications.
Page 15-66
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.9.2.D
Chapter 15
Detailing Considerations
HLMR bearings shall be designed, detailed, fabricated, and installed to facilitate inspection, maintenance, and eventual replacement. Jacking points shall be identified in the contract drawings so that bearings can be reset, repaired, or replaced. Prestressed concrete girder bridges having end Type A (semi - integral) need not be detailed to accommodate elastomeric bearing replacement at abutments. Prestressed concrete girder bridges having end Type B (L-type abutments) shall be designed and detailed to accommodate elastomeric bearing replacement at abutments. Specifically, girder stops and end diaphragms shall be detailed to accommodate the placement of hydraulic jacks. The standard end diaphragms for long-span girders may not have sufficient flexural and shear capacity to support jacking induced stresses. Sufficient steel reinforcement shall be provided to accommodate shear forces and bending moments induced by jacking. (Girder end Types A and B are depicted Chapter 5) Intermediate piers of prestressed concrete girder bridges having steel reinforced elastomeric bearings shall also be designed and detailed to facilitate bearing replacement. 15.9.2.E
Bearing Types
15.9.2.E.1
Elastomeric Bearings
Steel reinforced elastomeric bearings shall be designed using the AASHTO LRFD Method B procedure. Shear modulus shall be specified on the plans as 165 psi at 73˚ F without reference to durometer hardness. Elastomeric bearings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 251 - Plain and Laminated Elastomeric Bridge Bearings. Shims shall be fabricated from ASTM A 1011 Grade 36 steel unless noted otherwise on the plans. Bearings shall be laminated in ½-inch thick elastomeric layers with a minimum total thickness of 1 inch. For overall bearing heights less than 5 inches, a minimum of ¼ inch of side clearance shall be provided over the steel shims. For overall heights greater than 5 inches, a minimum of ½-inch of side clearance shall be provided. Live load compressive deflection shall be limited to 1/16-inch. Compressive dead load and live load shall be specified on the plans. With respect to width, elastomeric bearings shall be designed and detailed as follows: 1.
For prestressed concrete wide flange girders (WF36G to WF100G), the edge of the bearing pad shall be set between 1 inch minimum and 9 inch maximum inside of the edge of the girder bottom flange.
2.
For prestressed concrete I-girders, bulb-tee girders, and deck bulb-tee girders, the edge of the bearing pad shall be set 1 inch inside of the edge of the girder bottom flange.
3.
For all prestressed concrete tub girders, the edge of the bearing shall be set 1 inch inside of the edge of the bottom flange. Bearing pads for prestressed concrete tub girders shall be centered close to the centerline of each web.
4.
For all prestressed concrete slabs one bearing pad and corresponding grout pad is required for each end of the prestressed concrete slab. The centerline of the bearing and grout pad shall coincide with the centerline of the prestressed concrete slab. The need for steel shims shall be assessed during the bearing design.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-67
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
In order to facilitate compressive load testing, future bearing replacement, and vertical geometry coordination, the following table shall be included in the Plans: Bearing Design Table Service I Limit State Dead load reaction
--------- kips
Live load reaction (w/o impact)
--------- kips
Unloaded height
--------- inches
Loaded height (DL)
--------- inches
Shear modulus at 73º F
--------- psi
In the construction of precast prestressed concrete girder and steel girder bridges, elastomeric bearings need not be offset to account for temperature variation during erection of the girders. Girders may be set atop elastomeric bearings at temperatures other than the mean of the temperature range. This shall be statistically reconciled by assuming a maximum thermal movement in either direction of: Δtemp = 0.75 ∙ α ∙ L ∙ (TMaxDesign – TMinDesign)
where TMaxDesign is the maximum anticipated superstructure average temperature and TMinDesign is the minimum anticipated superstructure average temperature during the life of the bridge. For precast prestressed concrete girder bridges, the maximum thermal movement, Δtemp, shall be added to shrinkage and long-term creep movements to determine total bearing height required. The shrinkage movement for this bridge type shall be half that calculated for a cast-in-place concrete bridge. 15.9.2.E.2
Fabric Pad Sliding Bearings
Fabric pad sliding bearings incorporate fabric pads with a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) stainless steel sliding interface to permit large translational movements. Unfilled PTFE shall be used for fabric pad sliding bearings. Unfilled PTFE shall be recessed half its depth into a steel backing plate, which shall be bonded to the top of a fabric pad. The stainless steel sheet shall be seal welded to a steel sole plate attached to the superstructure. 1.
Fabric Pad Design Maximum service load average bearing pressure for fabric pad bearing design shall be 1,200 psi. Maximum service load edge bearing pressure for fabric pad bearing design shall be 2,000 psi.
2.
PTFE – Stainless Steel Sliding Surface Design PTFE having a maximum dimension less than or equal to 24 inches shall be at least 3/16-inch thick and recessed 3/32-inch into a minimum ½-inch thick steel plate that is bonded to the top of the fabric pad. PTFE having a maximum dimension greater than 24 inches shall be at least ¼ inch thick and shall be recessed ⅛-inch into a ½-inch thick steel plate that is bonded to the top of the fabric pad. Stainless steel sheet shall be finished to a No. 8 (Mirror) finish and shall be seal welded to the sole plate.
Page 15-68
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.9.2.E.3
Chapter 15
Pin Bearings
Steel pin bearings may be used to support heavy reactions with moderate to high levels of rotation about a single predetermined axis. 15.9.2.E.4
Rocker and Roller Type Bearings
Rocker bearings and steel roller bearings are not allowed for new bridges. 15.9.2.E.5
Spherical Bearings
Woven fabric PTFE shall be used on the curved surfaces of spherical bearings. When spherical bearings are detailed to accommodate translational movement, woven fabric PTFE shall be used on the flat sliding surface also. Woven fabric PTFE, which is mechanically interlocked over a metallic substrate, shall have a minimum thickness of 1/16inch and a maximum thickness of ⅛-inch over the highest point of the substrate. Spherical bearings shall be detailed with the concave surface oriented downward. Structural analysis of the overall structure shall recognize the center of rotation of the bearing not being coincident with the neutral axis of the girder above. The contract drawings shall show the diameter and height of the spherical bearing in addition to all dead, live, and seismic loadings. Sole plate connections, base plate, anchor bolts, and any appurtenances for horizontal force transfer shall be detailed on the plans. The spherical bearing manufacturer shall submit shop drawings and detailed structural design calculations of spherical bearing components for review and comment by WSDOT. 15.9.2.E.6
Disc Bearings
Disc bearings composed of an annular shaped polyether urethane disk with a steel shear-resisting pin in the center may be used. A flat PTFE - stainless steel surface may be incorporated into the bearing to also provide translational movement capability. 15.9.2.E.7
Seismic Isolation Bearings
Seismic isolation bearings may be used, subject to the restrictions outlined in Sections 4.2.2 and 9.3. A cost-benefit analysis comparing Type 1 (ductile substructure) design vs. Type 3 (seismic isolation) design shall be performed and submitted for approval to the Bridge Design Engineer. This analysis shall, as a minimum, address the life cycle costs and other impacts identified in Section 9.3.2. 15.9.2.F
Miscellaneous Details
15.9.2.F.1
Temporary Support before Grouting Masonry Plate
The masonry plate of an HLMR bearing shall be supported on a grout pad that is installed after the bearing and superstructure girders above have been erected. This sequence allows the Contractor to level and slightly adjust the horizontal location of the bearing before immobilizing it. Two methods for temporarily supporting the masonry plate are acceptable: 1.
Shim Packs Multiple stacks of steel shim plates may be placed atop the concrete surface to temporarily support the weight of the girders on their bearings before grouting.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-69
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
2.
Two-step Grouting with Cast Sleeves A two-step grouting procedure with cast-in-place voided cores may be used for smaller HLMRs not generally subjected to uplift. Steel studs are welded to the underside of the masonry plate to coincide with the voided cores. With temporary shims installed between the top of the concrete surface and the underside of the masonry plate, the voided cores are fully grouted. Once the first stage grout has attained strength, the shims are removed, the masonry plate is dammed, and grout is placed between the top of the concrete surface and the underside of the masonry plate.
15.9.2.F.2
Anchor Bolts
Anchor bolts shall be designed to resist all horizontal shear forces and direct tension force due to uplift. Anchor bolts shall be ASTM A 449 where strengths equal to ASTM A 325 are required and ASTM A 354, Grade BD, where strengths equal to ASTM A 490 are required. Anchor bolts shall be ASTM F 1554 bolts with supplemental Charpy test requirements in applications in which the bolts are subject to seismic loading. 15.9.2.G
Contract Drawing Representation
High load multi-rotational bearings shall be depicted schematically in the contract drawings. Each bearing manufacturer has unique fabricating methods and procedures that allow it to fabricate a bearing most economically. Depicting the bearings schematically with loads and geometric requirements provides each manufacturer the flexibility to innovatively achieve optimal economy. 15.9.2.H
Shop Drawing Review
High-load multi-rotational bearings shall be designed, tested, fabricated, QA/QC inspected, and installed in accordance with the Special Provisions in the RFP Appendix, including submittal of design calculations and shop drawings. 15.9.2.I
Bearing Replacement Considerations
Bearings shall be designed and detailed to permit the replacement of all elements subject to wear. Superstructure and substructure elements shall be designed and detailed to accommodate lifting of the superstructure using hydraulic jacks to facilitate bearing element replacement. For bearing replacements, the Design-Builder shall show anticipated lifting loads on the contract drawings. Limitations on lift height shall also be specified. Consideration shall be given to lift height as it relates to adjacent expansion joints elements and adjoining sections of railing. Restrictions on differential lift height between multiple jacks shall be specified to minimize stresses induced in adjacent structural elements. Jacks shall be sized for 200 percent of the calculated lifting load.
Page 15-70
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10
Signs, Barriers, Bridge Approach Slabs, and Utilities
15.10.1
Sign and Luminaire Supports
15.10.1.A
Chapter 15
Loads
15.10.1.A.1 General The reference used in developing the following office criteria is the AASHTO “LRFD for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic Signals,” First Edition Dated 2015 (including latest interims), and shall be the basis for analysis and design. 15.10.1.A.2 Dead Loads Sign: (Including panel and wind beams; does not include vert. bracing) 3.25 lbs/ft2 Luminaire (effective projected area of head = 3.3 sq feet)		 60 lbs/each Fluorescent Lighting							3.0 lbs/ft Standard Signal Head							60 lbs/each Mercury Vapor Lighting						6.0 lbs/ft Sign Brackets								Calc. Structural Members							Calc. 5 foot wide maintenance walkway: (including sign mounting brackets and handrail)			 160 lbs Signal Head w/3 lenses: (effective projected area with backing plate = 9.2 sq feet)		 60 lbs/each 15.10.1.A.3 Live Load A live load consisting of a single load of 500 lb distributed over 2.0 feet transversely to the member shall be used for designing members for walkways and platforms. The load shall be applied at the most critical location where a worker or equipment could be placed, see 2015 AASHTO Specifications Section 3.6. 15.10.1.A.4 Wind Loads A 3 second gust wind speed shall be used in the AASHTO wind pressure equation. The 3 second wind gust map in AASHTO is based on the wind map in ANSI/ASCE 7-16. The basic wind speed of 115 mph shall be used in computing design wind pressure using Equation 3.8.1-1 of AASHTO Section 3.8.1. This is based on the high risk category with a mean recurrence interval of 1700 years per AASHTO Table 3.8-1. The Alternate Method of Wind Pressures given in Appendix C of the AASHTO 2015 Specifications shall not be used.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-71
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.1.A.5 Fatigue Design Fatigue design shall conform to AASHTO Section 11 with the exception of square and rectangular tube shape. AASHTO does not provide fatigue calculations for shapes with less than 8 sides. Therefore, calculating the Constant Amplitude Fatigue Threshold, DT (Table 11.9.3.1-2, AASHTO 2015) was taken to be the larger outer flat to flat distance of the rectangular tube. Fatigue Categories are listed in Table 11.6-1. Overhead Cantilever and Bridge Sign and signal structures, high-mast lighting towers (HMLT), poles, and bridge mounted sign brackets shall conform to the following fatigue categories. Fatigue Category I: Overhead cantilever sign structures (maximum span of 35 feet and no VMS installation), overhead sign bridge structures, high-mast lighting towers 55 feet or taller in height, bridge-mounted sign brackets, and all signal bridges. Gantry or pole structures used to support sensitive electronic equipment (tolling, weighin-motion, transmitter/receiver antennas, transponders, etc.) shall be designed for Fatigue Category I, and shall also meet any deflection limitations imposed by the electronic equipment manufacturers. Fatigue Category II: For structures not explicitly falling into Category I or III. Fatigue Category III: Lighting poles 50 feet or less in height with rectangular or square cross sections, or non-tapered round cross sections, and overhead cantilever traffic signals (maximum cantilever length 65 feet). Sign bridges, cantilever sign structures, signal bridges, and overhead cantilever traffic signals mounted on bridges shall be either attached to substructure elements (e.g., crossbeam extensions) or to the bridge superstructure at pier locations. Mounting these features to bridges as described above will help to avoid resonance concerns between the bridge structure and the signing or signal structure. CCTV camera pole shall meet deflection criteria specified on Standard Plan J-29-15 for fixed base. The “XYZ” limitation shown in Table 10.1.4-2 shall be met for Monotube Cantilevers. The “XYZ” limitation consists of the product of the sign area (XY) and the arm from the centerline of the posts to the centerline of the sign (Z). See Appendix 10.1-A2-1 for details. 15.10.1.A.6 Ice and Snow Loads A 3 psf ice load may be applied around all the surfaces of structural supports, horizontal members, and luminaires, but applied to only one face of sign panels (Section 3.7, AASHTO 2015). Walk-through VMS shall not be installed in areas where appreciable snow loads may accumulate on top of the sign, unless positive steps are taken to prevent snow build-up. 15.10.1.A.7 Group Load Combinations Sign, luminaire, and signal support structures are designed using the load factors from Table 10.1.1-1, AASHTO 2015 (including latest interims).
Page 15-72
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.1.B
Chapter 15
Bridge Mounted Signs
15.10.1.B.1 Vertical Clearance All new signs mounted on bridge structures shall be positioned such that the bottom of the sign or lighting bracket does not extend below the bottom of the bridge as shown in Figure 10.1.2-1. Bridge mounted sign brackets shall be designed to account for the weight of added lights, and for the wind effects on the lights to ensure bracket adequacy if lighting is attached in the future. 15.10.1.B.2 Geometrics 1.
Signs shall be installed at approximate right angles to approaching motorists. For structures above a tangent section of roadway, signs shall be designed to provide a sign skew within 5 degrees from perpendicular to the lower roadway (see Figure 10.1.2-2).
2.
For structures located on or just beyond a horizontal curve of the lower roadway, signs shall be designed to provide a sign chord skew within 5 degrees from perpendicular to the chord-point determined by the approach speed (see Figure 10.1.2-3).
3.
The top of the sign shall be level.
15.10.1.B.3 Aesthetics 1.
The support structure shall not extend beyond the limits of the sign.
2.
The sign support shall be detailed in such a manner that will permit the sign and lighting bracket to be installed level.
15.10.1.B.4 Sign Placement 1.
Signs shall never be placed under bridge deck overhangs or directly under the dripline of the bridge.
2.
A minimum of 2 inches of clearance shall be provided between back side of the sign support and edge of the bridge, see Figure 10.1.2-5.
3.
VMS units shall not be installed on bridges.
4.
Top arm lengths exceeding 7’-0”, or any arm length with load demands exceeding the capacity of a 4” diameter standard pipe shall not be used.
15.10.1.B.5 Installation 1.
Adhesive anchors or cast-in-place ASTM F593 Type 304, Group 1 Condition CW anchor rods shall be used to install the sign brackets on the structure. Size and minimum installation depth shall be given in the plans or specifications. The adhesive anchors shall be installed normal to the concrete surface, and shall not be core drilled. Adhesive anchors shall not be placed through the webs or flanges of prestressed or post-tensioned girders. Adhesive anchors shall not be used at overhead locations other than with horizontal hole/anchor alignment.
2.
Bridge mounted sign structures shall not be placed on bridges with steel superstructures.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-73
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.1.B.6 Installing/Replacing Sign Panels on Existing Bridge Mounted Sign Brackets When installing a new sign panel on an existing bridge mounted sign bracket, the installation shall conform to the following. 1.
All hardware shall be replaced in accordance with Standard Specifications Section 9-28.11.
2.
The area of the new sign panel shall not exceed the area of the originally designed sign panel.
3.
The WSDOT inspection report for the bridge mounted sign bracket shall be reviewed to ensure the assembly is in good condition. If there is no inspection report, then an inspection shall be performed to establish the current condition of the assembly.
15.10.1.B.7 Material Specifications 1.
Material specifications shall be as shown in Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A6-1.
2.
All non-stainless steel parts shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M111 after fabrication. Bolts and hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M232.
15.10.1.B.8 Detailing For standard bridge mounted sign bracket details see Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1A6-1 to 10.1-A6-5. All information shown in the Layout (Bridge Standard Drawing 10.1-A6-1) shall be included on the contract plans. When attaching the lower bracket arm to concrete I-girders, concrete, box/tub girders, or steel I-girders, use Bridge Standard Drawing 10.1-A6-4A, 10.1-A6-4B, or 10.1-A6-4C, respectively. 15.10.1.C
Monotube Sign Structures Mounted on Bridges
15.10.1.C.1 Design Loads Design loads for the supports of the Sign Bridges shall be calculated based on assuming a 12 foot deep sign over the entire roadway width, under the sign bridge, regardless of the sign area initially placed on the sign bridge. For Cantilever design loads, guidelines specified in Section 10.1.1 shall be followed. The design loads shall follow the same criteria as described in Section 10.1.1. Loads from the sign bridge shall be included in the design of the supporting bridge. In cases where a sign structure is mounted on a bridge, the sign structure, from the anchor bolt group and above, shall be designed to AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic Signals, First Edition, dated 2015, including interims. The concrete around the anchor bolt group and the connecting elements to the bridge structure shall be designed to the specifications in this manual and AASHTO LRFD. Loads from the sign structure design code shall be taken as unfactored loads for use in AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications. 15.10.1.C.2 Vertical Clearance Vertical clearance for Monotube Sign Structures shall be 20′-0″ minimum from the bottom of the lowest sign to the highest point in the traveled lanes. See Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A1-1, 10.1A2-1, and 10.1-A3-1 for sample locations of Minimum Vertical Clearances. Page 15-74
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
15.10.1.C.3 Geometrics Sign structures shall be placed at approximate right angles to approaching motorists. Dimensions and details of sign structures are shown in the WSDOT Standard Plans G-60.10, G-60.20, G-60.30, G-70.10, G-70.20, G-70.30 and Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A1-1, 10.1-A1-2, and 10.1-A1-3 and 10.1-A1-1, 10.1-A1-2, and 10.1-A1-3. When maintenance walkways are included, refer to Standard Plans G-95.10, G-95.20, and G-95.30. 15.10.1.D
Monotube Sign Structures
15.10.1.D.1 Sign Bridge Conventional Design Table 10.1.4-1 provides the conventional structural design information to be used for a Sign Bridge Layout, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A1-1; along with the Structural Detail sheets, which are Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A1-1 and 10.1-A1-3; and General Notes, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A5-1; and Miscellaneous Details, Appendix 10.1-A5-2. Sign bridge span lengths shall not exceed 180-feet. 15.10.1.D.2 Cantilever Conventional Design Table 10.1.4-2 provides the conventional structural design information to be used for a Cantilever Layout, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A2-1; along with the Structural Detail sheets, which are Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A2-2 and 10.1-A2-3; and General Notes, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A5-1; and Miscellaneous Details, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A5-2. Cantilever arm lengths shall not exceed 35-feet. Cantilever sign structures shall not be used to support VMS signs. 15.10.1.D.3 Balanced Cantilever Conventional Design Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A3-1; along with the Structural Detail sheets, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A3-2 and 10.1-A3-3, General Notes, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A5-1; and Miscellaneous Details, Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A5-2 provides the conventional structural design information to be used for a Balanced Cantilever Layout, Balanced Cantilevers are typically for VMS sign applications and shall have the sign positioned so that no less than ⅓ of the sign dead load resides on either side of the post. 15.10.1.D.4 Monotube Sheet Guidelines The following guidelines apply when using the Monotube Sign Structure Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A1-1, 10.1-A1-2, and 10.1-A1-3; 10.1-A2-1, 10.1-A2-2, and 10.1-A2-3; 10.1-A3-1, 10.1-A3-2, and 10.1-A3-3; 10.1A4-1, 10.1A4-2, and 10.1A4-3; and 10.1-A51, 10.1-A5-2, and 10.1-A5-3. Each sign structure shall be detailed to specify: 1.
Sign structure base Elevation, Station, and Number.
2.
Type of Foundation 1, 2, or 3 shall be used for the Monotube Sign Structures, unless a non-conventional design is required. The average Lateral Bearing Pressure for each foundation shall be noted on the Foundation sheet(s).
3.
If applicable, label the Elevation View “Looking Back on Stationing”.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-75
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.1.D.5 VMS Installation 1.
VMS units shall not be installed on unbalanced cantilever structures.
2.
VMS installation on Sign Bridge structures designed in accordance with AASHTO 2015 shall be installed in accordance with the following: A. On spans 120 feet and greater up to two VMS units may be installed with a maximum weight of 4,000 lbs. each. Maintenance walkways may be installed between VMS units, but may not exceed 160 lbs/ft, or exceed 50 percent of the structure span length. B.
3. 15.10.1.E
On spans less than 120 feet up to three VMS units may be installed with a maximum weight of 4,000 lbs. each. Maintenance walkways may be installed between VMS units, but may not exceed 160 lbs/ft.
The number of VMS installed on Sign Bridge structures designed prior to AASHTO 2015 shall be reduced by one as defined in D.2-a and b. Foundations
15.10.1.E.1 Monotube Sign Structure Foundation Types The foundation type to be used shall be based on the geotechnical investigation performed and geotechnical report completed by the Geotechnical Engineer of record. Standard foundation designs for standard plan truss-type sign structures are provided in Standard Plans G-60.20, G-60.30, G-70.20, and G-70.30. Monotube sign structure foundations are Bridge Design Office conventional designs and shall be as described in the following paragraphs:
Page 15-76
1.
Foundation Type 1, is the preferred foundation type. A foundation Type 1 consists of a drilled shaft with its shaft cap. The design of the shaft depths shown in the Bridge Standard Drawings are based on a lateral bearing pressure of 2,500 psf. The designer shall check these shaft depths using LRFD methodology. For Type 1 foundation details and shaft depths see Bridge Standard Drawings 10.1-A4-1 and 10.1-A42. The geotechnical report for Foundation Type 1 should include the soil friction angle, soil unit weight, allowable bearing pressure and temporary casing if required. Temporary casing shall be properly detailed in all Foundation Type 1 sheets if the Geotechnical Engineer requires them.
2.
Foundation Type 2 is designed for a lateral bearing pressure of 2,500 psf. See Bridge Standard Drawing 10.1-A4-3 for Bridge Design Office conventional Foundation Type 2 design information. The designer shall check these shaft depths using LRFD methodology.
3.
Foundation Type 3 replaces the foundation Type 2 for poor soil conditions where the lateral bearing pressure is between 2,500 psf and 1,500 psf. See Bridge Standard Drawing 10.1-A4-3 for Bridge Design Office conventional Foundation Type 3 design information. The designer shall check these shaft depths using LRFD methodology.
4.
Barrier Shape Foundations are foundations that include a barrier shape cap on the top portion of Foundation Types 1, 2, and 3. Foundation details shall be modified to include Barrier Shape Cap details. See Bridge Standard Drawing 10.1-A5-1 details a single slope barrier.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
15.10.1.E.2 Luminaire, Signal Standard, and Camera Pole Foundation Types Luminaire foundation options are shown on WSDOT Standard Plan J-28.30. Signal Standard and Camera Pole foundation options are provided on WSDOT Standard Plans J-26.10 and J-29.10 respectively. 15.10.1.E.3 Foundation Design Shaft type foundations constructed in soil for sign bridges, cantilever sign structures, luminaires, signal standards and strain poles shall be designed in accordance with the current edition of the AASHTO LRFD Standard Specifications For Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic Signals; Section 13.16; Drilled Shafts. No provisions for foundation torsional capacity are provided in Section 10.13 of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic Signals. The following approach can be used to calculate torsional capacity of sign structure, luminaire, and signal standard foundations: Torsional Capacity, φTn, φTn = F*tanφD
Where: F = Total force normal to shaft surface (kip) D = Diameter of shaft (feet) φ = Soil to foundation contact friction angle (degree), use smallest for variable soils
1.
Monotube Sign Bridge and Cantilever Sign Structures Foundation Type 1 Design The standard embedment depth “Z”, shown in the table on Monotube Sign Structure Bridge Standard Drawing 10.1-A4-1, shall be used as a minimum embedment depth and shall be increased if the shaft is placed on a sloped surface, or if the allowable lateral bearing pressures are reduced from the standard 2500 psf. The standard depth assumed that the top 4 feet of the cast-in-place (C.I.P). cap is not included in the lateral resistance (i.e., shaft depth “D” in the code mentioned above), but is included in the overturning length of the sign structure. The sign structure shaft foundation GSPs under Section 8-21 in the RFP Appendix shall apply for all Foundation Type 1 shafts.
2.
Monotube Sign Structures Foundation Type 2 and 3 These foundation designs are Bridge Design Office convention and shall not be adjusted.
3.
Monotube Sign Structures Non-Conventional Design Foundations The Geotechnical Engineer of record shall identify any locations where the foundation types (1, 2, or 3) will not work. At these locations, the design forces are calculated, using the AASHTO LRFD Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires, and traffic Signals, and applied at the bottom of the structure base plate. These forces are then considered service loads and the nonconventional design foundation is designed with the appropriate Service, Strength, and Extreme Load Combination Limit States and current design practices of the AASHTO LRFD and this manual. The anchor rod array shall be used from Tables 10.1.4-1 and 10.1.4-2 and shall be long enough to develop the rods into the confined concrete core of the foundation. The rod length and the reinforcement for concrete confinement, shown in the top four feet of the Foundation Type 1, shall be used as a minimum.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-77
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
4.
Signal Foundation Design The traffic signal standard GSPs in the RFP Section 8-20 shall apply for foundations in substandard soils.
15.10.1.F
Truss Sign Bridges: Foundation Sheet Design Guidelines
If a Truss sign structure is used, refer to WSDOT Standard Plans for foundation details. There are four items that should be addressed when using the WSDOT Standard Plans, which are outlined below.
15.10.2
1.
Determine conduit needs. If none exist, delete all references to conduit. If conduit is required, verify as to size and quantity.
2.
Show sign bridge base elevation, number, dimension and station.
3.
The concrete barrier transition section shall be in accordance with the Standard Plans.
4.
The quantities shall be based on the Standard Plans details as needed.
Bridge Traffic Barriers
15.10.2.A
General Guidelines and Policy
The design criteria for traffic barriers on structures shall be in accordance with Chapter 13 of the AASHTO LRFD with the following supplemental guidelines: The minimum traffic barrier height shall be 42 inches to meet the “Fall Protection” requirements in Section 10.2.1. WSDOT standard 42-inch high Single Slope concrete barrier shall be used for barriers on new bridges, bridge approach slabs, retaining walls, Structural Earth Wall traffic barriers, and Geosynthetic wall traffic barriers. WSDOT standard 34-inch or 42-inch Single Slope concrete barrier shall be used for barriers on existing bridges and bridge rehabilitation projects. Use of 32-inch or 42-inch F-Shape concrete barrier shall be limited for continuity off structure or within a corridor. Use of Pedestrian concrete barrier shall be limited for locations with sidewalk. Use of 42-inch combination barrier (32-inch or 34-inch concrete barrier increased in height by metal railing) may be used only if allowed by the RFP Criteria. See Chapter 10 Appendix for available WSDOT standard bridge barrier designs. Barriers shall be designed for minimum Test Level 4 (TL-4) design criteria regardless of the barrier height. The Test Level shall be specified in the Plans. A Test Level 5 (TL-5) barrier shall be used on new structures for “T” intersections, for barriers on structures with a radius of curvature less than 500 feet (TL-4 is acceptable for barrier on the inside of the curve), locations with Average Daily Truck Traffic (ADTT) greater than 10 percent, and locations with approach speeds at 50 mph or greater (e.g. freeway off-ramps). See AASHTO LRFD Chapter 13 for additional Test Level selection criteria.
Page 15-78
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.2.B
Chapter 15
Design Criteria
15.10.2.B.1 Structural Capacity AASHTO LRFD Appendix A13 shall be used to design barriers and their supporting elements (i.e. deck). Concrete barriers shall be designed using yield line analysis as described in AASHTO LRFD Section A13.3.1. Deck overhangs supporting concrete barriers shall be designed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Section A13.4 as modified by Section 10.2.4.A. 15.10.2.B.2 Geometry The traffic face geometry is part of the crash test and shall not be modified. Concrete clear cover shall meet minimum concrete cover requirements and shall be increased to accommodate rustication grooves or patterns for architectural reasons. Concrete cover shall be increased to 2½″ for traffic face of barrier for slip form method of construction. The 3″ toe dimension of the F-Shape barrier shall be increased to accommodate HMA overlays to a maximum of 6″. For designing and detailing bridge decks with a superelevation of 8 percent or less, the exterior barrier and/or the median barrier shall be oriented perpendicular to the bridge deck. Bridge decks with a superelevation of more than 8 percent, the barrier on the low side of the bridge and/or median barrier shall be oriented perpendicular to an 8 percent superelevated bridge deck, and the barrier on the high side of the bridge shall be oriented perpendicular to the bridge deck. 15.10.2.B.3 Miscellaneous Design Information Steel reinforcement bars S1 and S2 or S3 and S4 and W1 and W2 (or equivalent bars) from Chapter 10 Appendix barrier standard drawings shall be included in the Bar List. Steel reinforcement bars S1, S2, S3, S4, AS1, AS2, and W1 (or equivalent bars) from Chapter 10 Appendix barrier standard drawings shall be epoxy coated. Any modifications to Chapter 10 Appendix barrier standard drawings or to WSDOT Standard Plans shall not alter or compromise the structural integrity and/or crash test performance of barrier. Modifications shall be submitted for review and acceptance by WSDOT for concurrence with design policies.
15.10.3
At Grade Concrete Barriers Differential grade concrete barriers with a grade difference greater than 4′-0″ shall be designed as reinforced concrete retaining walls with a traffic barrier at the top and a barrier shape at the cut face. Differential grade concrete barriers with a grade difference 4′-0″ or less shall be designed in accordance to AASHTO LRFD barrier loading with the following guidelines. Full depth expansion joints with shear dowels at the top shall be provided at 120′ maximum spacing. Barrier shall be continuous or have shear connections between barrier sections if precast.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-79
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.3.A
Differential Grade Concrete Barrier Design Criteria
15.10.3.A.1 Structural Capacity The structural capacity of the differential grade concrete barrier shall be designed for the required Test Level (TL) vehicle impact design forces in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Chapters 5 and 13. The minimum Test Level shall be TL-3. Any section along the differential grade concrete barrier shall not fail in shear, bending, or torsion when the barrier is subjected to the TL impact forces. The torsion capacity of the differential grade concrete barrier shall be equal to or greater than the traffic barrier moment generated by the TL impact forces applied to the top of the barrier. 15.10.3.A.2 Global Stability Global stability shall be in accordance with Section 10.3.1.A. 15.10.3.A.3 Geometry The top of the differential grade concrete barrier shall have a minimum width of 6″ with a minimum 6″ clear distance to each side of luminaire or sign pole if mounted on top of the differential grade concrete traffic barrier. The transition flare rate shall follow the Design Manual M 22-01. Barrier bottom shall be embedded a minimum 6″ below roadway. Roadway subgrade and ballast shall be extended below whole width of differential grade concrete barrier. 15.10.3.B
Traffic Barrier Moment Slab Design Criteria
15.10.3.B.1 Structural Capacity The structural capacity of the traffic barrier moment slab shall be designed for the required TL impact forces in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Chapters 5 and 13. The minimum Test Level shall be TL-4. Any section along the moment slab shall not fail in shear, bending, or torsion when the barrier is subjected to the TL impact forces. The moment slab reinforcement shall be designed to resist forces developed at the base of the barrier. Moment slab supporting concrete barrier shall be designed in accordance to Deck Overhang Design in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Section A13.4 as modified by Section 10.2.4.A. The torsion capacity of the moment slab shall be equal to or greater than the traffic barrier moment generated by the TL impact forces. 15.10.3.B.2 Global Stability See Section 10.3.2.B.2. 15.10.3.B.3 Geometry The minimum height of the traffic barrier portion of the moment slab shall be 42 inches above the finished roadway surface. Moment slabs shall have a minimum width of 4.0 feet measured from the point of rotation to the heel of the slab and a minimum average depth of 0.83 feet. Page 15-80
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
15.10.3.B.4 Soil Reinforcement Design of the soil reinforcement shall be in accordance with the Geotechnical Design Manual Chapter 15. 15.10.3.B.5 Wall Panel The wall panels shall be designed to resist the dynamic pressure distributions as defined in the Geotechnical Design Manual Chapter 15. The wall panel shall have sufficient structural capacity to resist the maximum design rupture load for the wall reinforcement designed in accordance with the Geotechnical Design Manual Chapter 15. 15.10.3.C
Precast Concrete Barrier
Concrete barrier Type 2 and Type 4 shall be used in accordance to Section 10.3.4.
15.10.4
Bridge Traffic Barrier Rehabilitation
15.10.4.A
General Guidelines and Policy
When identified in the RFP, deficient rails shall be improved or replaced within the limits of roadway resurfacing projects in accordance to Section 10.4. Retrofit shall be an approved crash tested rail system or shall be designed to the strength requirements set forth by Section 2 of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, 17th edition. See Section 10.4.4 and WSDOT Design Manual for replacement criteria. See Section 10.4.5 and 10.4.6 for available bridge rail retrofit and bridge rail replacement designs. 15.10.4.A.1 Design Criteria 1.
Structural Capacity A strength and geometric review shall be required for all bridge rail rehabilitation projects. The AASHTO LFD load of 10 kips shall be used in the retrofit of existing traffic barrier systems constructed prior to the year 2000. If the strength of the existing bridge rail and their supporting elements (i.e. deck) are unable to resist a 10 kip barrier impact design load or has not been crash tested, then modifications or replacement will be required to improve its redirectional characteristics and strength. If the design of the bridge rehabilitation includes other bridge components that will be designed using AASHTO LRFD then the following minimum equivalent Extreme Event (CT) traffic barrier loading can be used: Flexure = (1.3)*(1.67)*(10 kip) / (0.9) = 24.10 kip Shear = (1.3)*(1.67)*(10 kip) / (0.85) = 25.54 kip
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-81
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
2.
Geometry Standard thrie beam guardrail post spacing is 6′-3″ except for the SL-1 Weak Post, which is at 8′-4″. Post spacing can be increased up to 10′-0″ if the thrie beam guardrail is nested (doubled up). Guardrail shall be continuous without gaps. Design F guardrail end sections shall be used at the approach and trailing end of these gaps. Standard Plan thrie beam guardrail transitions shall be used at each corner of the bridge. Placement of the retrofit system will be determined from the WSDOT Design Manual.
15.10.5
Bridge Railing
15.10.5.A
General Guidelines and Policy
Pedestrian and bicycle/pedestrian railings shall be designed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Chapter 13 with the following supplemental guidelines. Railings shall be designed for vehicular impact load or be successfully crash tested unless location is low speed, location is outside of Design Clear Zone as defined in Design Manual Chapter 1600, or location has minimal safety consequence from collapse of railing. Minimum height of 54″ shall be provided for bicycle railings on structures. Fall Protection railing shall meet the requirements of WAC 296-155. See Section 10.5.2 for available bridge railing designs.
15.10.6
Bridge Approach Slabs Bridge approach slabs are required for the following structures:
• New bridges
• Widened bridges (full roadway width)
• Class 1 and Class 2 Buried Structures without a full roadways section (including HMA and CSBC) within 25 feet of each end of the buried structure Bridge runoff at the abutments shall be carried off and collected at least 10 feet beyond the bridge approach slab.
15.10.6.A
Bridge Approach Slab Design Criteria
The standard bridge approach slab design is based on the following criteria: 1.
The bridge approach slab is designed as a slab in accordance with AASHTO LRFD. (Strength Limit State, IM = 1.33, no skew).
2.
The support at the roadway end is assumed to be a uniform soil reaction with a bearing length that is approximately ⅓ the length of the approach slab, or 25′/3 = 8′.
3.
The Effective Span Length (Seff), regardless of approach length, is assumed to be: 25′ approach – 8′ = 17′.
Page 15-82
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
4.
Longitudinal reinforcing bars do not require modification for skewed approaches up to 30 degrees or for slab lengths greater than 25′.
5.
The bridge approach slab is designed with a 2″ concrete cover to the bottom reinforcing.
15.10.6.B
Bridge Approach Slab Detailing
The minimum dimension from the bridge is 25′. AS1 bars shall be epoxy coated. Bending diagrams shall be shown for all custom reinforcement. All Bridge Approach Slab sheets will have the AP2 and AP7 bars. If there is a traffic barrier, then AP8, AS1, and AS2 bars shall be shown. Longitudinal contraction joints are required on bridge approach slabs wider than 40 feet or where steps are used on skewed alignments. Joints shall be located at lane lines or median barrier and in accordance with Bridge Standard Drawing 10.6-A1-2. 15.10.6.C
Skewed Bridge Approach Slabs
For all skewed abutments, the roadway end of the bridge approach slab shall be normal to the roadway centerline. Skews greater than 20-degrees require analysis to verify the bottom mat reinforcement, and may require expansion joint modifications. The roadway end of the approach may be stepped to reduce the size or to accommodate staging construction widths. At no point shall the roadway end of the approach slab be closer than 25′ to the bridge. These criteria apply to both new and existing bridge approach slabs. If stepped, the design shall provide the absolute minimum number of steps and the longitudinal construction joint shall be located on a lane line. See Figure 10.6.4-1 for clarification. In addition, for bridges with traffic barriers and skews greater than 20 degrees, the AP8 bars shall be rotated in the acute corners of the bridge approach slabs. Typical placement is shown in the flared corner steel detail, see Figure 10.6.4-2. 15.10.6.D
Approach Anchors and Expansion Joints
For semi-integral abutments or stub abutments, the joint design shall be checked to ensure the available movement of the standard joint is not exceeded. For bridge approach slabs with barrier, the compression seal shall extend into the barrier. L Type Abutments Use a pinned connection in accordance with Section 10.6.5. 15.10.6.E
Bridge Approach Slab Addition or Retrofit to Existing Bridges
Bridge approach slabs on existing bridges shall be pinned to the existing pavement seat, or attached with approach anchors. The pinning option is only allowed on semi-integral abutments as a bridge approach slab addition or retrofit to an existing bridge. Figure 10.6.6-1 shows the pinning detail. As this detail eliminates the expansion joint between the bridge approach slab and the bridge, the maximum bridge superstructure length is limited to 150′. Additionally, if the roadway end of the bridge approach slab is adjacent to PCCP roadway, then the detail shown in Figure 10.6.6-2 applies. PCCP does not allow for as much movement as HMA and a joint is required to reduce the possibility of buckling. WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-83
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
When pinning is not applicable, then the bridge approach slab shall be attached to the bridge with approach anchors. If the existing pavement seat is less than 10 inches, the seat shall be modified to provide at least 10 inches of seat width. When a bridge approach slab is added to an existing bridge, the final grade of the bridge approach slab concrete shall match the existing grade of the concrete bridge deck, including bridges with asphalt pavement. The existing depth of asphalt on the bridge shall be shown in the Plans and an equal depth of asphalt placed on a new bridge approach slab. If the existing depth of asphalt is increased or decreased, the final grade shall also be shown on the Plans. 15.10.6.F
Bridge Approach Slab Staging
Ensure staging follows traffic control. Add mechanical splice option as shown in Figure 10.6.6-3 when needed.
15.10.7
Traffic Barrier on Bridge Approach Slabs A gap between the bridge approach slab and wingwall (or retaining wall) shall be shown in the details. The minimum gap is twice the long-term settlement, or 2 inches as shown in Figure 10.7-1. When the traffic barrier is placed on the bridge approach slab,
• Barrier shall extend to the end of the bridge approach slab
• Conduit deflection or expansion fittings shall be called out at the joints
• Junction box locations shall start and end in the approach
• The transverse top reinforcing in the slab shall be sufficient to resist a traffic barrier impact load.
15.10.7.A
Bridge Approach Slab over Wing Walls, Cantilever Walls or Geosynthetic Walls
All walls that are cast-in-place below the bridge approach slab shall continue the barrier soffit line to grade as shown in Figure 10.7.1-1. 15.10.7.B
Bridge Approach Slab over SE Walls
The barrier soffit line shall match that for the SEW barrier starting at the bridge expansion joint as shown in Figures 10.7.2-1 and 10.7.2-2.
15.10.8
Utilities Installation on New and Existing Structures
15.10.8.A
General Concepts
The utilities included under this section are those described in Standard Specifications Section 6-01.10. Bridge plans shall include all hardware specifications and details for the utility attachment as described in the RFP. 15.10.8.A.1 Coating and Corrosion Protection When the bridge is to receive pigmented sealer, any exposed utility lines and hangers shall be painted to match the bridge. When a pigmented sealer is not required, steel utility conduits and hangers shall be painted or galvanized for corrosion protection. The RFP Criteria shall specify cleaning and painting procedures. Page 15-84
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.8.B
Chapter 15
Utility Design Criteria
All utilities shall be designed to resist Strength and Extreme Event Limits States. Utility support design calculations shall be stamped with a State of Washington Professional Engineer stamp, signed and dated. Positive resistance to loads shall be provided in all directions perpendicular to and along the length of the utility as required by the utility engineer. Dynamic fluid action due to loads shall be resisted off the bridge. Where utilities are insulated, the insulation system shall be designed to allow the intended motion range of the hardware supporting the utility. Conduit shall be rigid. 15.10.8.B.1 Utility Location Utilities shall be located, such that a failure will not result in damage to the bridge, the surrounding area, or be a hazard to traffic. The utility shall be installed between girders. Utilities and supports shall not extend below the bottom of the superstructure. Utilities shall be installed no lower than 1 foot 0 inches above the bottom of the girders. Utilities shall not be attached above the bridge deck nor attached to the railings or posts. 15.10.8.B.2 Termination at the Bridge Ends Utility conduit and encasements shall extend 10 feet minimum beyond the ends of the structure. Utilities off the bridge shall be installed prior to paving of approaches. 15.10.8.B.3 Utility Expansion The utilities shall be designed with a suitable expansion system as required to prevent longitudinal forces from being transferred to bridge members. 15.10.8.B.4 Utility Blockouts Blockouts shall be provided in all structural members that prohibit the passage of utilities, such as girder end diaphragms, pier crossbeams, and intermediate diaphragms. These blockouts shall be large enough to fit deflection fittings, and shall be parallel to the utility. For multiple utilities, a note shall be added to the plans that the deflection fittings shall be staggered such that no fitting is located adjacent to another, or the blockouts shall be designed to fit both fittings. Expansion fittings shall be staggered. 15.10.8.B.5 Gas Lines or Volatile Fluids Pipelines carrying volatile fluids through a bridge superstructure shall be designed in accordance with WAC 480-93, Gas Companies—Safety, and Minimum Federal Safety Standard, Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section part 192. WAC 468-34-210, Pipelines - Encasement, describes when casing is required for carrying volatile fluids across structures.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-85
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.8.B.6 Water Lines Transverse support or bracing shall be provided for all water lines to carry Strength and Extreme Event Lateral Loading. In box girders (closed cell), a rupture of a water line will generally flood a cell before emergency response can shut down the water main. This shall be designed for as an Extreme Event II load case, where the weight of water is a dead load (DC). Additional weep holes or open grating, or full length casing extending 10-feet beyond the end of the bridge approach slab shall be used to offset this Extreme Event (see Figure 10.8.3-1). 15.10.8.B.7 Sewer Lines Sewer lines shall meet the same design criteria as waterlines. Encasement pipe is required for sewer lines on bridges that cross over water or roads. 15.10.8.B.8 Electrical (Power and Communications) Telephone, television cable, and power conduit shall be galvanized Rigid Metal Conduit (RGS) or Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit (PVC). Where such conduit is buried in concrete curbs or barriers or has continuous support, such support is considered to be adequate. Where hangers or brackets support conduit at intervals, the maximum distance between supports shall be in accordance with Section 10.8.6. 15.10.8.C
Box/Tub Girder Bridges
Utilities shall be located between girders or under the bridge deck soffit when the reinforced concrete box or tub girders are less than 4 feet inside clear height. Special utilities (such as water or gas mains) in box girder bridges shall use concrete pedestals. Continuous supports shall not be used. 15.10.8.D
Traffic Barrier Conduit
All new bridge construction shall install two 2-inch galvanized Rigid Metal Conduit (RGS) or Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit (PVC) in the traffic barriers. PVC conduit may be used only in stationary-form barriers, and will connect to RGS using a PVC adaptor when exiting the barrier. RGS conduit may be used in stationary-form barriers, but it shall be used in slipform barriers. Each conduit shall be stubbed-out into its own concrete junction box at each corner of the bridge. The galvanized steel conduit shall be wrapped with corrosion resistant tape at least one foot inside and outside of the concrete structure, and this requirement shall be so stated on the plans. The corrosion resistant tape shall be 3M Scotch 50, Bishop 5, Nashua AVI 10, or approved equal. Pull boxes shall be provided at a maximum spacing of 180 feet. For fiber optics only, spacing shall not exceed 360 feet. The pull box size shall conform to the specifications of the National Electric Code or be a minimum of 8 inches by 8 inches by 18 inches to facilitate pulling of wires. Galvanized steel pull boxes (or junctions boxes) shall meet the specifications of the “NEMA Type 4X” standard for stationary-form barrier, shall meet the specifications of the “NEMA 3R” and be adjustable in depth for slip form barrier, and the NEMA junction box type shall be stated on the plans. Stainless steel pull boxes may be used as an option to the galvanized steel. Page 15-86
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
In the case of existing bridges, an area 2 feet in width shall be reserved for conduit beginning at a point either 4 feet or 6 feet outside the face of usable shoulder. 15.10.8.E
Conduit Types
All electrical conduits shall be galvanized Rigid Metal Conduit (RGS) or Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit (PVC). 15.10.8.F
Utility Supports
All utility installations shall address temperature expansion in the design of the system or expansion devices. Utility supports shall be designed so that any loads imposed by the utility installation do not overstress the conduit, supports, bridge structure, or bridge members. Designs shall provide longitudinal and transverse support for loads from gravity, earthquakes, temperature, inertia, etc. Vertical supports shall be spaced at 5 foot maximum intervals for telephone and power conduits, and at a spacing to resist design loads for all other utilities. For Schedule 40 steel conduit, 4” or greater, support spacing may be increased to 8 feet maximum if the design loads permit. Drilling into prestressed concrete members for utility attachment shall not be allowed. 15.10.8.F.1 Pipe Hangers For heavy pipes over traffic (10″ water main or larger), a Safety Factor of 1.5 shall be used to resist vertical loads for Strength design. The cast-in-place insert shall be at least 6″ long and hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M 111 or AASHTO M 232. The insert shall not interfere with reinforcement in the bridge deck. The inserts shall be installed level longitudinally and transversely. Transverse supports shall, at a minimum, be located at every other vertical support. Bridge Standard Drawings 10.8-A1-1 and 10.8-A1-2 depict typical utility support installations and placement at abutments and diaphragms. 15.10.8.F.2 Surface Mounting Utilities to be installed on existing structures that cannot be located between girders may be mounted under the deck soffit. Adhesive anchor shall be design in accordance with Section 10.10. Bridge Standard Drawing 10.8-A1-3 shows typical mounting locations for concrete beam of box girder bridges. Anchors shall be located 3” minimum from the edge of deck or other concrete surfaces.
15.10.9
Review Procedure for Utility Installations on Existing Structures Utility installations on existing bridges shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 10.9.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-87
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.10.10 Anchors for Permanent Attachments The design procedure for cast-in-place and post-installed anchors shall be in accordance with AASHTO LRFD 5.13. Adhesive and undercut anchors shall meet the assessment criteria in accordance with ACI 355.4 and ACI 355.2, respectively. Fast set epoxy anchors shall not be used for adhesive anchors. Undercut anchors shall be stainless steel.
15.10.11 Drainage Design All drainage system expansion joints shall be watertight. 15.10.11.A Geometrics Bridges shall have a minimum transverse slope of .02′/feet and a minimum longitudinal slope of 0.5 percent. 15.10.11.B Hydrology Hydrological calculations are made using the rational equation. A 10 year storm event with a 5 minute duration is the intensity used for all inlets except for sag vertical curves where a 50 year storm intensity is required. 15.10.11.C On Bridge Systems Drains shall only be placed on bridge structures when required by bridge deck drainage hydraulics analysis and where alignment and superelevation geometry cannot be adjusted to compensate. The minimum pipe diameter shall be 6 inches with no bends greater than 45° within the system.
Page 15-88
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.11
Chapter 15
Detailing Practices Structural detailing shall meet the requirements of this section. For best practices, examples and figures, refer to Chapter 11 of the Bridge Design Manual (LRFD) M 23-50.20.
15.11.1
Standard Practices
15.11.1.A Drawing Orientation and Layout Control
• Contract plans shall be printed, sealed, signed and submitted on 11″ × 17″ paper. Alternatively, the Contract plans may be submitted in an electronic format accepted by WSDOT encrypted with a valid electronic signature.
• Drawings shall be organized so the intent of the drawing is easily understood. 1.
North arrow shall be placed on layouts and footing/foundation layouts.
2.
Related details shall be grouped together in an orderly arrangement, lined up horizontally and vertically and drawn to the same scale.
3.
The Plan view layout of structures shall be oriented from left to right in the direction of increasing state route mileposts. For layouts of existing bridges undergoing widening, expansion joint or thrie beam retrofit, or other structural modification, this orientation requirement may result in the bridge layout being opposite from what is shown in the original plans. In such cases, the bridge layout orientation and pier identification shall be laid out to be consistent with the WSDOT Bridge Preservation Office inspection records.
4.
Except for the Layout, wall elevations are to show the exposed face regardless of direction of stationing. The Layout sheet stationing shall read increasing left to right. The elevation sheets shall represent the view in the field as the wall is being built.
15.11.1.B Lettering 15.11.1.B.1 General 1.
Lettering shall be upper case only, slanted at approximately 68 degrees. General text is to be approximately ⅛″ high.
2.
Text shall be oriented so as to be read from the bottom or right edge of the sheet.
3.
Detail titles shall be a similar font as general text, about twice as high and of a heavier weight. They shall be underlined with a single line having the same weight as the lettering.
4.
The True Type fonts “BridgeTech Italic” (BRIDT__.TTF, BRIDRG__.TTF) shall be used, exclusive of title blocks, and may be downloaded for use by the Design-Builder from the WSDOT Bridge and Structures web site.
15.11.1.B.2 Dimensioning 1.
A dimension shall be shown once on a drawing. Duplication and unnecessary dimensions shall be avoided.
2.
All dimension figures shall be placed above the dimension line, so that they may be read from the bottom or the right edge of the sheet.
3.
When details or structural elements are complex, utilize two drawings, one for dimensions and the other for reinforcing bar details.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-89
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
4.
Dimensions 12 inches or more shall be given in feet and inches unless the item dimensioned is conventionally designated in inches (for example, 16″ø pipe).
5.
Dimensions that are less than one inch over an even foot, the fraction shall be preceded by a zero (for example, 3′-0¾″).
6.
Dimensions shall be placed outside the view, preferably to the right or below. However, in the interest of clarity and simplicity it may be necessary to place them otherwise.
15.11.1.C Line Work 1.
All line work shall be of sufficient size, weight, and clarity so that it can be easily read on a 11″ × 17″ sheet.
2.
The line style used for a particular structural outline, centerline, etc., shall be kept consistent wherever that line is shown within a set of plans.
3.
Line work shall have appropriate gradations of width to give line contrast. Care shall be taken that the thin lines are dense enough to show clearly when reproduced.
4.
When drawing structural sections showing reinforcing steel, the outline of the sections shall be a heavier line weight than the reinforcement steel.
5.
The order of line precedence (which of a pair of crossing lines is broken) shall be as follows: A. Dimension lines are never broken. B.
Leader line from a callout.
C.
Extension line.
15.11.1.D Scale 1.
CAD Sheet Models shall be configured using standard architectural or engineering scales for referencing. All details shall be accurately represented at scale. Scales shall not be shown in the plans.
2.
The minimum scale for a section detail with rebar shall be ⅜″ = 1′. The minimum scale to be used on steel details shall be ¾″ = 1′.
15.11.1.E Graphic Symbols Graphic symbols shall be in accordance with the following: 1.
Structural steel shapes: See the AISC Steel Construction Manual.
2.
Welding symbols: See the Lincoln Welding Chart.
3.
Symbols for hatching different materials are shown on Appendix 11.2-A2.
15.11.1.F Structural Sections, Views and Details
Page 15-90
1.
Whenever possible, sections and views shall be taken looking to the right, ahead on stationing, or down.
2.
The orientation of a detail drawing shall be identical to that of the plan, elevation, etc., from which it is taken. Where there is a skew in the bridge any sections shall be taken from plan views.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
3.
The default view orientation is to be looking ahead on stationing. Other orientations shall be noted.
4.
A circle divided into upper and lower halves shall identify structural sections, views, and details. Examples are shown in Appendix 11.2-A3.
5.
Breaks in lines are allowable provided that their intent is clear.
15.11.1.G Miscellaneous 1.
Callout arrows shall come off either the beginning or end of the sentence. This means the top line of text for arrows coming off the left of the callout or the bottom line of text for arrows pointing right.
2.
Key notes shall be used to cover sheet specific notes and callouts in accordance with BDM Section 11.1.1.D.4.
3.
Key note flags shall be used to reference key notes within the drawing area. Each note flag will use the same symbol and corresponding number as found in the key notes.
4.
Key note flags shall be an elongated hexagon that is ¼” in height and ½” in length with each corner chamfered at 45° tapering to a single point at each end. The number shall be centered horizontally and vertically within.
5.
A Key note flag legend symbol shall be placed as part of the primary legend found typically on the first sheet of a plan set as this is a continuous standard found throughout the set in the same way a section or detail callout is.
15.11.1.H RFC Revisions 1.
Changes made to Released For Construction (RFC) plan sheets shall be clouded with the exception of table entries which shall be shaded in accordance with the Plans Preparation Manual Appendix 5. Subsequent changes shall be clouded or shaded and the clouding and shading from previous changes shall be removed.
2.
Changes shall be marked with a number in a circle in a triangle.
3.
Changes shall be noted in the revision block at the bottom of the sheet using Lucida Console font 12pt.
15.11.1.I
Title Block
1.
The project title shall be displayed in the plan sheet title block. The title consists of Line 1 specifying the highway route number(s), Line 2 and possibly Line 3 specifying the title verbiage. Bridge structures shall have a fourth line, in a smaller font, to specify the bridge name and number in accordance with the Bridge List M 23-09 and Sections 2.3.1.A and 2.3.2.A.
2.
The highway route number(s) in Line 1 shall be consistent with WSDOT naming practice. Interstate routes (5, 82, 90, 182, 205, 405, and 705) shall be specified as I-(number). US routes (2, 12, 97, 97A, 101, 195, 197, 395, and 730) shall be specified as US (number). All other routes shall be specified as SR (number). Projects including two highway routes shall include both route numbers in Line 1, as in “US 2 And I-5”. Projects including three or more highway routes shall be specified with the lowest numbered route, followed by “Et Al”, as in “SR 14 Et Al”.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-91
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.11.1.J Reinforcement Detailing 1.
Contract documents shall convey all necessary information for fabrication of reinforcing steel. In accordance with Standard Specifications Section 6-02.3(24), reinforcing steel details shown in the bar list shall be verifiable in the plans and other contract documents.
2.
Size, spacing, orientation and location of reinforcement shall be shown on the plan sheets.
3.
Reinforcement shall be identified by mark numbers inside a rectangle. Reinforcing bar marks shall be called out at least twice. The reinforcement including the spacing is called out in one view (such as a plan or elevation). The reinforcement without the spacing is called out again in at least one other view taken from a different angle (such as a section).
4.
Epoxy coating for reinforcement shall be shown in the plans by noting an E inside a triangle.
5.
The spacing for reinforcement shall be on a dimension line with extension lines. Do not point to a single bar and call out the spacing. Reinforcement spacing callouts shall include a distance. If the distance is an unusual number, give a maximum spacing. Do not use “equal spaces” as in “23 equal spaces = 18′-9″. Also, never use the word “about” as in 23 spaces @ about 10″ = 18′-9″. Instead these should read “23 spaces @ 10″ max. = 18′-9″.
6.
Reinforcement geometry shall be clear in plan details. Congested areas, oddly bent bars, etc. can be clarified with additional views/details/sections or adjacent bending diagrams. In bending diagrams, reinforcement dimensions shall be given out-to-out. It may be necessary to show edges of reinforcement with two parallel edge lines to clearly show working points and dimensions.
7.
Reinforcement lengths, angles, etc. need not be called out when they can be determined from structural member sizes, cover requirements, etc. Anchorage, embedment and extension lengths of reinforcement shall be dimensioned in the plans.
8.
Standard hooks in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Section 5.10.2.1 need not be dimensioned or called out, but shall be drawn with the proper angle (90º, 135º or 180º). Seismic hooks per AASHTO LRFD Section 5.10.2.2 (used for transverse reinforcement in regions of expected plastic hinges) shall be called out on the plans whenever they are used.
9.
The location, length and stagger of lap splices shall be shown on the plan sheets. Tables of applicable lap splice lengths are acceptable with associated stagger requirements. Type, location and stagger of mechanical and welded splices of reinforcement shall be shown.
10. Where concrete cover requirements differ from those given in the standard notes or Standard Specifications Section 6-02.3(24)C, they shall be shown in the plans. It shall be clear whether the cover requirement refers to ties and stirrups or the main longitudinal bars.
Page 15-92
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.11.2
Chapter 15
Bridge Office Standard Drawings and Office Examples
15.11.2.A General The Bridge and Structures Office provides standard drawings and example sheets of various common bridge elements. These drawings are found in dwg and pdf formats under Engineering Standards on the WSDOT website (Design topics | WSDOT (wa.gov)). 15.11.2.B Use of Standards The WSDOT Bridge Standard Drawings are to be considered as nothing more than examples of items like girders or traffic barriers which are often used and are very similar from job to job. The drawings shall be modified to fit the particular aspects of the structure. They shall not be included in a contract plan set without close scrutiny for applicability to the job and verification of all design loads and requirements by the design consultant. WSDOT is not responsible for any discrepancies, errors, and omissions in these Standard Design Drawings.
15.11.3
Plan Sheets Plan sheets shall be assembled in the order of construction and shall include the items listed below.
• Layout
• Framing Plan
• General Notes/Construction Sequence
• Typical Section
• Footing/Foundation Layout
• Piles/Shafts
• Bridge Deck Reinforcement (Plan and transverse section)
• Abutments
• Expansion Joints (if needed)
• Intermediate Piers/Bents
• Traffic Barrier
• Bearing Details
• Bridge Approach Slab
• Girders/Diaphragms
15.11.3.A Layout
• The Layout sheet shall contain, but is not limited to: – Plan View with ascending stations from left to right – Elevation View shown as an outside view of the bridge and shall be visually aligned with the plan view.
• Alignment lines, vertical curves and roadway superelevation diagrams. – Test hole locations (designated by 3/16 inch circles, quartered) to plan view. – Elevation view of footings, seals, piles, etc. Show elevation at Bottom of footing and, if applicable, the type and size of piling. – General notes above legend on right hand side, usually in place of the typical section. – Title “LAYOUT” in the title block and sheet number in the space provided. – Other features, such as lighting, conduit, signs, excavation, riprap, etc. as determined by the designer. WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-93
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.11.3.B General Notes/Construction Sequence
• The general notes sheet shall contain, but is not limited to those shown in Section 11.1.3 15.11.3.C Footing Layout
• An abutment with a spread footing has a Footing Layout. An abutment with piles and pile cap has a Foundation Layout.
• The Footing Layout is a plan of the bridge whose details are limited to those needed to locate the footings. The intent of the footing layout is to minimize the possibility of error at this initial stage of construction.
• The Foundation Layout is a plan of the bridge whose details are limited to those needed to locate the shafts or piles. The intent of the Foundation layout is to minimize the possibility of error at this initial stage of construction.
• Other related information and/or details such as pedestal sizes, and column sizes are considered part of the pier drawing and should not be included in the footing layout.
• The Footing Layout should be shown on the layout sheet if space allows. It need not be in the same scale. When the general notes and footing layout cannot be included on the first (layout) sheet, the footing layout should be included on the second sheet.
• Longitudinally, footings should be located using the survey line to reference such items as the footing, centerline pier, centerline column, or centerline bearing, etc.
• When seals are required, their locations and sizes should be clearly indicated on the footing layout.
• The Wall Foundation Plan for retaining walls is similar to the Footing Plan for bridges except that it also shows dimensions to the front face of wall.
• Appendix 11.1-A4 is an example of a footing layout showing: – The basic information needed. – The method of detailing from the survey line. 15.11.3.D Piles/Shafts
• Pile and shaft details will be associated with a Foundation Layout or a Footing Layout (if the footing is to have piles below, acting as a pile cap more so than a spread footing).
• These detail sheets will come immediately after the Foundation Layout or Footing Layout if they are to be used to support an Abutment or directly after the abutment sheets if used to support Intermediate Piers. 15.11.3.E Abutment
• Abutment piers shall be detailed separately due to the elevation views being opposite directions in relation to stationing. This will mitigate any chance for confusion in the field due to asymmetrical profiles or grades, and any differences in skew.
• Bridge elements that have not yet been built will not be shown. For example, the superstructure is not to be shown, dashed or not, on any substructure details.
• Elevation information for seals and piles or shafts may be shown on the abutment or pier sheets.
Page 15-94
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Chapter 15
• Views are to be oriented so that they represent what the contractor or inspector would most likely see on the ground. Pier 1 elevation is often shown looking back on stationing. A note should be added under the Elevation Pier 1 title saying “Shown looking back on stationing”. 15.11.3.F Intermediate Piers/Bents
• Each pier shall be detailed separately as a general rule. If the intermediate piers are identical except for height, then they can be shown together. 15.11.3.G Bearing Details 15.11.3.H Framing Plan
• Girder Lines must be identified in the plan view (Gir. A, Gir. B, etc.).
• For adjacent deck girder bridges, such as slab girders and wide flange thin deck girders, the framing plan shall be based on the girder centerline or centerline work point rather than the gap width between adjacent girders. 15.11.3.I
Typical Section
• Girder spacing, which is tied to the bridge construction baseline
• Bridge deck thickness, as well as web and bottom slab thicknesses for box girders
• “A” dimension
• Limits of pigmented sealer
• Profile grade and pivot point and cross slopes
• Utility locations
• Curb to curb roadway width
• Soffit and drip groove geometry 15.11.3.J Girders/Diaphragms
• Prestressed girder sheets, end diaphragm sheets, and intermediate diaphragm can be copied from the Bridge and Structures Office library but they shall be modified to match the project requirements. 15.11.3.K Bridge Deck Reinforcement
• Plan and transverse section views
• Traffic barrier reinforcing bars shall be called out on the Bridge Deck Reinforcement Plan sheet by using an overall dimension. The S1 and S2 bars are to be detailed, dimensioned, and their spacing shall be shown only on the Traffic Barrier Details 1 sheet. 15.11.3.L Expansion Joints 15.11.3.M Traffic Barrier
• Traffic barrier sheets can be copied from the Standard Plans but they must be modified to match the project requirements.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-95
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.11.3.N Bridge Approach Slab
• Approach slab sheets can be copied from the Standard Plans and modified as necessary for the project. 15.11.3.O Barlist
• The barlist sheets do not require stamping because they are not officially part of the contract plan set.
15.11.4
Structural Steel
15.11.4.A General Flat pieces of steel are termed plates, bars, sheets or strips, depending on the dimensions. 15.11.4.B Bars Up to 6 inches wide, 0.203 inch (3/16-inch) and over in thickness, or 6 inches to 8 inches wide, 0.230 inch (7/32-inch) and over in thickness. 15.11.4.C Plates Over 8 inches wide, 0.230 inch (7/32-inch) and over in thickness, or over 48 inches wide, 0.180 in (11/64-inch) and over in thickness. 15.11.4.D Strips Thinner pieces up to 12 inches wide are strips and over 12 inches are sheets. A complete table of classification may be found in the AISC Manual of Steel Construction, 8th Ed. Page 6. 15.11.4.E Labeling The following table shows the usual method of labeling some of the most frequently used structural steel shapes. Note that the inches symbol (“) is omitted, but the foot symbol (‘) is used for length including lengths less than a foot. Figure 11.1.5-E1
Page 15-96
LENGTH IN FEET AND INCHES
THICKNESS IN INCHES
LENGTH IN FEET AND INCHES
WALL THICKNESS IN INCHES
WIDTH IN INCHES
WIDTH IN INCHES
GROUP SYMBOL
LENGTH IN FEET AND INCHES
WALL THICKNESS IN INCHES
OUTSIDE DIAM. IN INCHES
GROUP SYMBOL
1½"ø STD PIPE DESIGNATION
LENGTH IN FEET AND INCHES
CONVENTION FOR "ROUND"
SIZE IN INCHES
GROUP SYMBOL
BAR 2 ø x 0'-4
HSS 3.000 x 0.250 x 2'-5 GROUP SYMBOL
LENGTH IN FEET AND INCHES
CONVENTION FOR "SQUARE"
SIZE IN INCHES
GROUP SYMBOL
BAR 2 ¨ x 3'-4
HSS 6 x 5 x ¼ x 3'-2
NOMINAL DIAM. IN INCHES
LENGTH IN FEET AND INCHES
THICKNESS IN INCHES
WIDTH IN INCHES
GROUP SYMBOL
BAR 2 x ¾ x 0'-6
SHORT LEG IN INCHES
GROUP SYMBOL
LENGTH IN FEET AND INCHES
WIDTH IN INCHES
THICKNESS IN INCHES
GROUP SYMBOL
LONG LEG IN INCHES
L 6 x 5 x ¾ x 2'-1
¡ ½ x 34 x 5'-6
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.11.5
Chapter 15
Aluminum Section Designations The designations used in the tables are suggested for general use. Section I-Beams Wide-Flange Sections Wide-Flange Sections, Army-Navy Series American Standard Channels Special Channels Wing Channels Army-Navy Channels Angles Square End Angles Bulb Angles Bulb Angle, Army-Navy Series Tees Army-Navy Tees Zees Plates Rods Square Bars Rectangle Bars Round Tubes Square Tubes Rectangle Tubes
Designation I DEPTH × WT WF DEPTH × WT WF(A-N) DEPTH × WT
Example 14 × 3.28 WF4 × 4.76 WF(A-N)4 × 1.79
C DEPTH × WT
C4 × 1.85
CS DEPTH × WT CS4 × 3.32 CS(WING) WIDTH × WT CS(WING)4 × 0.90 C(A-N) DEPTH × WT C(A-N)4 × 1.58 L LL × LL × TH L3 × 3 × 0.25 LS LL × LL × TH LS2 × 2 × 0.187 BULB L LL1 × LL2 × TH1 × TH2 BULB L4 × 3.5 × 0.375 × 0.375 BULB L(A-N) LL1 × LL2 × TH1 × TH2 BULB L(A-N) 3 × 2 × 0.188 × 0.188 T DEPTH × WIDTH × WT T(A-N) DEPTH × WIDTH × WT Z DEPTH × WIDTH × WT PL TH × WIDTH RD DIA SQ SDIM RECT TH × WIDTH ODIA OD × TH WALL ODIM SQ × TH WALL DEPTH × WIDTH RECT × TH WALL
T4 × 4 × 3.43 T(A-N)4 × 4 × 2.27 Z4 × 3.06 × 2.85 PL¼ × 8 RD 1 SQ 4 RECT¼ × 4 4OD × 0.125 WALL 3SQ × 0.219 WALL 4 × 1.5 RECT × 0.104 WALL
WT - WEIGHT in LB/FT based on density of 0.098 TH - THICKNESS, LL - LEG LENGTH, DIA – DIAMETER ODIA - OUTSIDE DIAMETER, ODIM - OUTSIDE DIMENSION SDIM - SIDE DIMENSION All lengths are in inches
15.11.6
Abbreviations Abbreviations shall be defined in the contract documents.
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-97
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.12
Bridge Load Rating
15.12.1
General Load ratings shall be completed for all new, widened, or rehabilitated bridges where the rehabilitation alters the load carrying capacity of the structure. Load ratings shall be done immediately after the design is completed and rating calculations shall be filed separately in accordance with Section 13.4 and files shall be forwarded to WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer. A final stamped and signed load rating shall be provided at least 90-days prior to opening any bridge requiring load rating to traffic. Final approval of the load rating of a bridge shall rest with WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer. New bridges shall be rated based on the Load and Resistance Factor Rating (LRFR) method in accordance with the AASHTO Manual For Bridge Evaluation (MBE), Chapter 13 of this manual and this chapter. NBI ratings shall be based on the HL-93 truck and shall be reported as a rating factor.
15.12.2
Load Rating Software For prestressed concrete girder bridges and X-Beams, use BridgeLink to load rate structural elements. For all other cases where BridgeLink cannot be used, such as but not limited to, or steel structures or segmental boxes, CSiBridge shall be used. Obtain WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer’s approval for the use of any other software prior to commencing any work. For more complex structures such as steel curved girders and arches, different software may be used to analyze the loads after obtaining approval from WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer. Acceptable software currently includes CSiBridge. Loads and capacities shall be tabulated in a manner that will make it simple for WSDOT to manipulate the data in the future. Method of tabulation shall be approved by WSDOT’s Load Rating Engineer prior to commencing any work. Microsoft Excel shall be used for tabulation, and all cells in the spreadsheets shall be unlocked and any hidden code or functions shall be explained thoroughly in the report. Hand calculations shall be provided to verify all spreadsheets.
Page 15-98
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.13
Chapter 15
Appendices Appendix 15.2-A1
Conceptual Plan Checklist
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-99
Chapter 15
Appendix 15.2-A1
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Conceptual Plan Checklist
Project ________________ SR ______ Concept Plan by ____________ Check by _____ Date_______
Plan
Miscellaneous Survey Lines and Station Ticks
Assumed Structure Type
Survey Line Bearings
Live Loading
Roadway and Median Widths
Undercrossing Alignment Profiles/Elevs .
Bridge Deck Lane and Shoulder Widths
Bridge Deck Superelevation Diagrams
Bridge Deck Sidewalk Width
Bridge Deck Alignment Curve Data
Profile Grade and Pivot Point
Names
Roadway Superelevation Rate (if constant) Traffic Arrows
Elevation
Back to Back of Pavement Seats
Full Length Reference Elevation Line
Span Lengths
Existing Ground Line x ft . Rt of Survey Line
Existing utilities Type, Size, and Location
Pier Stations
Stream Flow Arrow
Profile Grade Vertical Curves
R/W Lines and/or Easement Lines
BP/Pedestrian Rail
Points of Minimum Vertical Clearance
Minimum Vertical Clearances
Exist . Bridge No . (to be removed, widened)
Water Surface Elevations and Flow Data
Section, Township, Range
Datum
City or Town
Grade elevations shown are equal to …
North Arrow SR Number Bearing of Piers, or note if radial Typical Section Bridge Roadway Width Lane and Shoulder Widths Profile Grade and Pivot Point Superelevation Rate Survey Line BP/Pedestrian Rail dimensions Assumed Structure Depth/Prestressed Girder Type
Page 15-100
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
15.99
Chapter 15
References AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, Latest Edition and Interims. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Washington, D.C. AASHTO Guide Specifications for LRFD Seismic Bridge Design (SEISMIC), Latest Edition and Interims. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Washington, D.C. AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, 17th edition AASHTO Manual for Bridge Evaluation ACI 355.4-11 (2014) “Qualification of Post-Installed Adhesive Anchors in Concrete and Commentary,” American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, MI. WSDOT Bridge Inspection Manual M 36-64 WSDOT Geotechnical Design Manual M 46-03 WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01 WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 WSDOT Local Agency Guidelines M 36-63 WSDOT Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction (Standard Specifications) M 41-10 WSDOT Standard Plans M 21.01 WSDOT Hydraulics Manual M 23-03 Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission Clearance Rules and Regulations Governing Common Carrier Railroads American Railway Engineering and Maintenance Association (AREMA) Manual for Railroad Engineering. Note: This manual is used as the basic design and geometric criteria by all railroads. Use these criteria unless superseded by FHWA or WSDOT criteria. The Union Pacific Railroad “Guidelines for Design of Highway Separation Structures over Railroad (Overhead Grade Separation)”
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 
Page 15-101
Chapter 15
Structural Design Requirements for Design-Build Contracts
Page 15-102
WSDOT Bridge Design Manual M 23-50.21 