
RFQ Issue Date
Approx. 8 to 12 weeks before RFP issue (#14)
3
Voluntary Submitter’s Meeting
7 to 10 days after #2
4
Deadline for Submission of Submitters’ Questions
2 weeks prior to #7
5
Deadline for requesting Username and Password for WSDOT SFTP site
2 weeks prior to #7
Must be done to ensure Submitters have access to the WSDOT SFTP site.
6
Deadline for WSDOT Response to Submitters’ Questions
1 week after #4 and 1 week before #7
• Provide guidance on where to find the answer in the RFQ
• Issue an addendum
7
SOQ Due Date
4 to 6 weeks after #2
Provide a longer timeline for SOQ development if advanced notification of the project was not given to industry.
8
SOQ Review Checklist
Day after #7
Done by Contract Ad & Award
9
SOQ Evaluations
Allow 3 to 5 weeks between #7 and #11
Projects may receive several SOQs for review. Ensure sufficient time is provided for Evaluators to review and comment on SOQs and for the Evaluation Team to combine comments.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
During this period your website will be posted with the advertisement notice, fact sheet and any informational documents. This period builds the Interested Parties List and is important for generating interest in large or unusual projects.
Must occur after advertisement in Daily Journal of Commerce (DJC). The DJC is published every Friday, and the advertisement must be submitted to Contract Ad & Award before Wednesday in order to be published the same week.
Page 5-5
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
Exhibit 5-3 #
Action
Typical schedule logic
Notes
10 Internal Debriefs with Before #11 WSDOT Management and Executive Teams
Present evaluation results to project, region, and Headquarters (HQ) management and executives to gain their concurrence. Schedule debriefs prior to advertising RFQ to ensure availability of executives. See the Internal Debriefs subsection of this chapter for a list of executives to be invited to the debrief meetings.
11 Notify Short Listed Submitters
Before #14
WSDOT Project Team provides a letter to Contract Ad & Award to publish shortlisted Submitters. WSDOT Project Team provides copies of each Submitter’s evaluation comments, individual score, summary scoring sheet for each submitter without other Submitters’ names
12 Protest
Notice of protest must be filed within 7 days of #11
Protests have the potential to delay the procurement. See RFQ Section 7.13 for more details.
13 External Debriefs with Submitters
Immediately following the end of the protest period
Step 2 – Proposal Phase
Page 5-6
14 RFP Issue Date
Week of #11
Within the week after notification of short list. Maybe longer depending on circumstances.
15 Voluntary Proposer’s Meeting
5 to 10 days after #14
Provide a short period of time for the short listed Submitters to review the RFP.
16 1:1 Meeting
Start within 1 week of #14 and end 2 to 3 weeks prior to #20
1 to 2 hour(s) per week per Proposer. Consider scheduling meetings to occur all on the same day.
17 ATC Submittal Deadline
2 to 3 weeks prior to #20
WSDOT has 14 calendar days to evaluate ATCs, then provide a 2 week “quiet period” for Proposers to finalize proposal.
18 Deadline for Submission of Proposers’ Questions
2 to 3 weeks prior to #20
19 Deadline for WSDOT Response to Proposers’ Questions
1 to 2 weeks after #17 Ensure WSDOT has enough time to and at least 2 weeks answer questions and that the Proposers before #20 have a “quiet period” prior to proposal due date. This is the last day to issue an addendum.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
Exhibit 5-3 #
Action
Typical schedule logic
Notes
20 Proposal Due Date
6 to 9 months after #14 (typical)
This varies greatly depending on the scope/ complexity of the project. To take advantage of innovative design solutions, a minimum of 6 to 9 months should be provided for proposal development. Emergency projects could have 2 month procurement periods, but this would be an exception.
21 Proposal Review Checklist
Day after #20
Done by Contract Ad & Award
22 Proposal Evaluations
Allow a minimum of 3 to 6 weeks between #20 and #26
Include time for Evaluators to review and score proposals, and for the Evaluation Team to combine comments.
23 Internal Debrief with Within week after #22 WSDOT Management
Time to present evaluation results to project, region, and HQ executives. Debrief meetings should be scheduled while the SOQ debriefs are being scheduled to ensure availability of executives.
24 Price Proposals Opening
Within week after #22
The unsealing of the proposal price always occurs on a Wednesday (unless Monday is a holiday) WSDOT Project Team provides copies of each proposer’s evaluation comments, individual score, and summary scoring sheet without the other proposer’s names.
25 Announce Apparent Best Value Proposer
Same time as #22
Allow time for evaluation and debrief/ concurrence from Region and HQ Executive Teams
26 Protest
Within 9 business days after #25
Protests have the potential to delay the procurement. See ITP Section 8.0 for more details.
27 Notice to Award
Within 45 calendar days after #25
Prior to award, you will need to submit your list of agreed betterments to Contract Ad & Award.
28 Pay Stipends
Within 30 calendar days after receiving Form N, Stipend Invoice.
WSDOT will pay a Stipend to all Proposers who submit a Form M (Stipend Agreement), Form N (Stipend Invoice) and responsive proposal.
29 Execution of Contract
20 to 40 calendar days after #27
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-7
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
Exhibit 5-3 #
5-4
Action
Typical schedule logic
30 Practical Design Workshop (Optional)
Within 7 calendar days after #29 and before #32
31 External Debrief with Proposers
Within 14 calendar days after #29 and must be after #26
32 Estimated Notice to Proceed
Up to 30 calendar days after #27 and 29
Notes Within 7 calendar days of Contract execution, and prior to issuing NTP, the parties will discuss and potentially initiate a Practical Design Workshop. The Practical Design Workshop may last up to 30 Calendar Days
Approx. 7 days to Award (can be expedited if necessary) and 3 weeks to Execute the Contract (cannot be expedited without changing the ITP – DBer is allowed 20 days to return signed contract).
Approval of Design-Build Projects to Advertise All DB projects must have formal approval action for the RFQ and RFP to be published. Publishing the RFQ is a function of the RFP and shall be based on a readiness assessment of the RFP. The form of this approval action will depend on the risks WSDOT will be assuming with the publishing of the RFQ and RFP. It is the goal of WSDOT to minimize risks associated with the RFQ and RFP prior to publishing. The risk levels are not to be confused with right of way certification status. Right of way certification is specific to the status of right of way acquisition needed for the project. The risk levels detailed below quantify risk associated with all the project development disciplines, including right of way certification. This assessment needs to be a collaborative effort between the Region and Headquarters. The risk levels described below are associated with an assessment of the RFP status. The assessment is intended to determine that all components of the RFP are on track to be completed and incorporated into the RFP prior to Issue RFP Date. Prior to publishing the RFQ, Region and HQ will conduct a collaborative assessment of the RFP to determine if it is on target for the Ad Date by comparing the target dates in the Design-Build to Advertisement Checklist to the actual schedule dates. The “Level of Confidence” column in the checklist will be used to document whether all key elements are tracking by selecting green, yellow, or red status.
Page 5-8
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
5-4.1
Chapter 5
Level 1 Approval This approval level is for projects that demonstrate that all aspects of the project are on track to be complete by the “Target Date” column in the checklist, and there is high confidence (all green) the RFP will be complete by the Ad Date. Approval action shall consist of a letter from the Region to Contract Ad & Award Office certifying the project meets the conditions of a Level 1 Approval.
5-4.2
Level 2 Approval This approval level is for projects that are generally on track to be complete by the Target Date, but still have some activities/issues to be resolved prior to the Ad Date. Note, elements in the checklist that are at risk to miss the Target Date but are tracking to be complete prior to Ad Date shall have a yellow Confidence Level. Elements that are tracking to be complete after the Ad Date shall have a red Confidence Level. Approval action for these projects shall consist of a letter from the Region to the Contract Ad & Award Office, certifying the project meets the criteria for a Level 2 Approval, and identifying all outstanding issues along with a plan to resolve said issues prior to the Ad date. Approval to publish the RFQ will require concurrence by HQ Construction. This concurrence will be based on the risk associated with outstanding issues and the likelihood of resolving them prior to the scheduled Ad date.
5-4.3
Level 3 Approval This approval level is for projects that are not on track for completion prior to the Ad Date, missing critical elements required for a complete biddable project, but there is a clear and compelling need to begin the advertisement process. Note, elements in the checklist that are at risk to miss the Target Date but are tracking to be complete prior to Ad Date shall have a yellow Confidence Level. Elements that are tracking to be complete after the Ad Date shall have a red Confidence Level. Approval action for these projects shall consist of a letter from the Region to the Contract Ad & Award Office, certifying the project meets the criteria for a Level 3 Approval, identifying all outstanding issues along with a plan to resolve said issues two weeks prior to the proposal due date. HQ’s approval to proceed to RFQ publishing will be based on clearly defined risk associated with outstanding issues, and a plan for resolving said issue two weeks prior to the scheduled proposal due date. In the event all issues are not resolved, and appropriate conditions incorporated into the contract a minimum of two weeks before the proposal due date, the proposal due date may be extended. Any conditions incorporated into the RFP and extensions proposal due date will require concurrence by HQ Construction.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-9
Chapter 5
5-5
General Procurement Activities
Electronic Submittal Process It is the intent of WSDOT to implement a “paperless” DB process in accordance with Executive Order E 1066.00, Executive Order E 1010, and RCW 19.360. Part of the “paperless” DB initiative is to move away from hard copy, paper documents and allow for the electronic submittal of SOQs and proposals. Contract Ad & Award, HQ DB and the IT Division developed an electronic submittal process, outlined below, that allows Submitters and Proposers to send in their submissions securely and remotely.
5-5.1
WSDOT Secure File Transfer Protocol WSDOT is requiring that all DB procurements be submitted completely electronically. Electronic submittal of the SOQs and the Technical Proposal is accomplished using a WSDOT Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) site. Shortly after the Voluntary Submitters Meeting, Submitters will request a username and password, then use an FTP Client to configure and connect to the WSDOT SFTP site using their assigned username and password. This WSDOT SFTP site is set up once a DB contract is advertised and published on the Contract Ad & Award page.
5-5.2
Requesting a Username and Password To connect to the WSDOT SFTP site, Submitters must request a username and password from Contract Ad & Award by sending an email caa@wsdot.wa.gov. Once a username and password are requested, Contract Ad & Award will forward the request on to the IT Division so that a username and password can be generated for the Submitter. This username and password is unique to the Submitter and only applicable to the specific contract that the Submitter plans on pursuing. To submit a Technical Proposal, Short Listed Submitter will use the same username and password Contract Ad & Award assigned to them in the SOQ phase to connect to WSDOT SFTP site once again in the proposal phase.
5-5.3
Statement of Qualifications Electronic Submittal SOQs are submitted prior to the SOQ due date to WSDOT via the WSDOT SFTP site. At midnight on the SOQ due date, Submitters will have their access to the WSDOT SFTP site revoked so that Contract Ad & Award can conduct their SOQ review using the SOQ Review Checklist. After the SOQ review, SOQs are passed along to the Evaluation Team.
5-5.4
Proposal Electronic Submittal The Proposal is separated into two parts: Technical Proposal and Price Proposal. The Proposer must follow two separate processes to submit. Technical Proposals and Form C, Upset Amount Determination (if applicable to the project) are also uploaded to the WSDOT SFTP site the same way SOQs were submitted. After midnight on the proposal due date, Proposers will have their access to the WSDOT SFTP site revoked so that Contract Ad & Award can conduct their proposal review using the Proposal Review Checklist. After the proposal review, Technical Proposals are passed along to the Evaluation Team.
Page 5-10
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
Price Proposals and Proposal Bonds are submitted electronically using BidX. Former Form B, Price Proposal and Form F, Proposal Bond are built into BidX, so they are no longer part of the ITP. Proposers will need a BidX account, have an approved digital ID, submit a request to bid with WSDOT, then download the bid file in advance. Once their account is set up, Proposers can submit their electronic proposal bond and complete their price proposal through BidExpress. The Bid may be resubmitted as many times as needed prior to the deadline. Bids are still publicly opened by the Contract Ad & Award office on the date of the Apparent Best Value determination.
5-6
Contract Ad & Award DB contracts follow a different process during contract advertisement and contract award than Design-Bid-Build (DBB) or small works contracts. Typically, DB contracts have a need to enter the advertisement and award period before the RFQ has been fully developed to share informational documents with interested parties and start to gain notice in the contracting community. This is referred to as the pre-advertisement period. Due to the number and size of advertising documents on a DB contract, these documents are shared with contractors electronically through use of a website. Because all documents are shared electronically, a GovDelivery distribution list is created by Contract Ad & Award and this list is used to communicate to interested parties throughout the procurement period. Throughout this period, the project office generating documents will work with Contract Ad & Award who will manage, post, and notify interested parties of these documents. These processes are outlined in detail below.
5-6.1
Initiating the Advertisement and Award Period To initiate the advertisement and award process, a contract number for the subject contract must be assigned. Contract numbers are assigned by the Contract Administration and Payment System (CAPS) office in HQ Accounting. Email CAPS@wsdot.wa.gov with a request for a contract number. Contract Ad & Award will post new DB project pages and notices on Mondays so the request for a contract number needs to reach CAPS by no later than Wednesday afternoon the week prior. The request should include the following items: 1. A request for a contract number 2. The Construction Project Engineer’s (PE) name (if known). Otherwise the Design PE’s name may be given. 3. The proposed advertisement date (when the RFQ is published) for the DB contract (if known) 4. Evidence of construction funding
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-11
Chapter 5
5-6.2
General Procurement Activities
Request a Project Webpage and Document Directory To request a webpage and document directory, email caa@wsdot.wa.gov by no later than 1:00 p.m. on the Wednesday prior to the project page going live on Monday. Provide Contract Ad & Award with the following information: 1. Project Title 2. County 3. Name, phone number, and email address of the project contact that will be receiving questions for the project Contract Ad & Award will create a project webpage for the project, creating a file directory on the ftp://ftp.wsdot.wa.gov/contracts server and create a GovDelivery subscription service for interested parties to sign up to receive alerts about the project during the procurement process. Note that Contract Ad & Award cannot create the project webpage and document directory until a request for a contract number is submitted and the contract number is provided from HQ CAPS.
5-6.3
Advertisement Notice As is customary with developing, advertising, and awarding work, WSDOT publicly communicates its intent to procure the DB project. This communication effort informs industry partners of WSDOT’s intent to solicit proposals, and it establishes a process and opportunity for WSDOT and industry partners to begin to exchange information, gain understanding, and measure interest. The project office should allow up to 30 Calendar Days for this step. The project office shall prepare the Advertisement Notice using an official WSDOT letterhead template and, at a minimum, include the following information:
• Project title
• Contract number
• The schedule for the procurement process
• The approximate construction value
• Prequalification bidding amount and major work class number
• Scope of work/a brief description of the project
• RFQ advertisement date
• Date, time, and place of the Voluntary Submitters Meeting
• Links to project website and interested parties list
• Small and Veteran-Owned Business Enterprise (SVBE)/ Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE)/Federal Small Business Enterprise (FSBE) Goal (as applicable) and On-The-Job Training and Apprentice Utilization goals (as applicable)
Page 5-12
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
• Outstanding permits
• Outstanding agreements
• Utility and railroad issues
• Right of way issues
• EBASE job number and version Authorization of the notice content and approval to release should be obtained from the Regional Administrator, Regional Administrator for Construction, or HQ Construction. Once the notice is approved, email it to caa@wsdot.wa.gov.
5-6.4
Submitting Documents for Web Posting and Notifications The project office will need to set up another location on the FTP site that you can use as a directory for submitting your documents to Contract Ad & Award. Small documents can be attached to an email and sent to caa@wsdot.wa.gov but large documents will need to be saved on the FTP server and you may send a link to the file directory. Please use care in choosing your file and folder names and adhere to the following best practices when setting up your appendices and creating folders and files:
• Do not use spaces in folder and files names – remember these will become internet links and web browsers turn every space into “%20”
• Do not use underscores “_” in file names. When viewing the URL it is not possible to tell whether or not the symbol is there because all URL text appears underlined.
• Only use safe characters in file and folder names (alphanumeric and limited special characters (although we recommend using no special characters as a best practice))
• File and folder names should be as short as possible.
• Do not repeat the same text in file and folder names.
• Do not repeat the name of the project in file and folder names.
• Shorten whenever possible (example – use “A” instead of Appendix). The total length of the URL cannot be more than 256 characters (if it is, most browsers will not allow users to view the files and they will get an error message). Contract Ad & Award will review and rename your documents as necessary to conform to best practices for web posting and to be consistent with other DB contracts, and post them in the file directory for your contract at: ftp://ftp.wsdot.wa.gov. Contract Ad & Award will also update your project webpage and add links to the new documents. When that is completed, Contract Ad & Award will send an alert to the GovDelivery account for your project informing interested parties that new documents are available.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-13
Chapter 5
5-7
General Procurement Activities
Statement of Qualification Process 5-7.1
Voluntary Submitters Meeting After the issuance of the RFQ, WSDOT typically holds a voluntary meeting for potential Submitters that provides information regarding the project and answers questions arising from the RFQ. There is not a set agenda for the meeting, but common topics are:
• Introduction of WSDOT Project Team
• Project Scope
• Project Goals
• Review SOQ Process
• Electronic Submittal Process
• Minority and Women Business Enterprise (MWBE)/SVBE/DBE Networking The WSDOT Project Team is usually present and introduced. The WSDOT Project Team is available to describe and answer questions on the project scope and goals. The SOQ process is reviewed, including important dates. The Voluntary Submitter’s Meeting should elaborate on exactly how the project goals will be scored. The discussion with Submitters regarding the scoring of goals should be the same as will be used with the Evaluation Team. To the extent that there are goals or participation requirements for MWBE, SVBE or DBE, these are explained. In addition, sometimes there is a networking event set up for Submitters, and the details of the event are announced. Submitters should be informed that, to the extent that any information in the meeting conflicts with information in the RFQ or any of other procurement documents, the written procurement document will govern. The purpose of this announcement is to encourage the flow of information. Because it is impossible for the people holding the meeting to be certain that the information provided in response to questions is 100 percent accurate, Submitters should be encouraged to refer to the documents in writing as the final word on any issues.
5-7.2
Request for Username and Password This process should take place no less than 2 weeks before the SOQ due date. See Section 5-5.2 above for more information on this process.
5-7.3
Request for Qualifications Questions, Clarifications, and Addenda The clarification process allows WSDOT to respond to Submitters’ questions during the RFQ advertisement period. Submitters may have two types of questions: proprietary (confidential) or general questions. Initial determination of whether a question is general or proprietary can be made by simply asking the Design-Builder if they would object to WSDOT posting their question online. The PE shall employ their professional judgement when considering Design-Builder claims of proprietary questions. If the PE disagrees with the Design-Builder and considers their question to be general (non-proprietary), then
Page 5-14
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
they may choose to not answer the question unless the Design-Builder agrees to allow WSDOT to post it online. A response to a proprietary question will be sent directly to the Submitter that asked the question. A response to a general question will be posted on the project webpage for all to see. Responses to clarification questions need to be carefully drafted for consistency and ensure fair competition. Clarification responses are meant to clarify the RFQ, but should not be used to materially change the RFQ. Material changes to the RFQ should be modified via the addendum process. All responses to clarification questions need to be approved by the Assistant State Construction Engineer (ASCE).
5-7.4
Request for Qualifications Addenda RFQ addenda are generated by clarification questions but can also be generated to modify the contents of the RFQ. Submitters begin preparing SOQs shortly after the RFQ is issued. Changes to the RFQ often have a major impact on SOQs. If a notable addendum needs to be issued less than 2 weeks before the SOQ due date, the PE should consider delaying the SOQ due date. Please notify Contract Ad & Award whenever a change to the SOQ will impact a document submittal date or otherwise require rescheduling of Contract Ad & Award resources.
5-7.5
Receipt of Statement of Qualifications Contract Ad & Award receives all SOQs and completes the SOQ review check using the SOQ Review Checklist. Contract Ad & Award will compile and distribute the Submitter’s List with Single Point of Contact.
5-7.6
Evaluation Process The evaluation of SOQs is done by the Evaluation Team. For more information on the evaluation process, see Chapter 6.
5-7.6.1
Short Listing
The short listing of contractors will take place following the completion and acceptance of the Evaluation Process as described in Chapter 6. The Project Team will provide the short list letter, unsuccessful letter, complete scoring spreadsheet, summary comments for each submitter, detailed scores for each submitter and summary scores with the names of each submitter removed to Contract Ad & Award for review, signing and distribution. Contract Ad & Award and distribute the short list information and scoring to each submitter.
5-7.6.2
Protests
Contract Ad & Award will receive and respond to any protests.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-15
Chapter 5
5-8
General Procurement Activities
Request for Proposal Process 5-8.1
Voluntary Proposers Meetings After the issuance of the ITP/RFP, WSDOT typically holds a voluntary meeting for Proposers that provides information regarding the project and answers questions arising from the ITP or RFP. There is not a set agenda for the meeting, but common topics are:
• Introduction of WSDOT Project Team
• Engineers Estimate/Upset Amount
• Project Scope
• Procurement Schedule
• Project Goals
• Outstanding ROW
• Electronic Submittal Process
• Supplemental Boring Program
• Review any unique RFP content
• Alternative Technical Concept (ATC) Process
Typically, there will be very few questions, with the Proposers holding their cards close in this public setting. This is the reason we hold confidential 1:1 meetings.
5-8.2
1:1 Meetings The 1:1 meetings are an effective communications tool during the procurement process. Very important discussion occurs here. These meetings require significant effort by WSDOT and Proposer, but also offer significant value. The WSDOT Project Team should recognize the significant effort required for the 1:1 meeting process when determining staffing levels on DB projects. Consider keeping staff participation small and limit consulting support to ensure the strictest confidentiality. In general, the following project personnel each have a role during the 1:1 meetings: 1. Point of Contact/PE
• Quality control responses to formal questions and addenda
• Solicit Engineering Manager (EM) and ASCE approvals 2. Design Manager/Conceptual Design Lead/Team Leader
• Write responses to formal questions and addenda 3. Procurement Manager
• Record/track issues, questions, addenda
• Resolve 1:1 action items
• Facilitate coordination with Contract Ad & Award
• Maintain original and conformed documents 4. Approving Authority – EM/ASCE
• Review and approve formal questions and addenda
Page 5-16
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
The 1:1 meetings are confidential and conducted individually with each short listed Proposer. WSDOT cannot disclose information about competing Proposers, including their relative standing among the other Proposers. WSDOT cannot disclose any specific pricing that a Proposer must meet. In 1:1 meetings, Proposers may ask any questions they wish. The meetings are the Proposer’s to manage, although WSDOT should track any action items. The Procurement Manager should request that the Proposers send an agenda at least 2 days prior to the meeting to allow WSDOT time to organize subject matter experts to attend the meeting as necessary. The meetings are an appropriate venue for the Procurement Manager to discuss pending addendums, progress on permits or ROW, or any other updates. These updates must be consistent between all the Proposers. Questions may range from evaluation processes, RFP content, scope of work, to what does WSDOT consider a good example of “xyz”. In most DB procurements where the Proposers develop their designs, the owner has very little communication with the proposers and, therefore, the owner has limited opportunity to provide input and guidance regarding the design. WSDOT is unique in the number of 1:1 meetings it conducts with its Proposers. These meetings allow for significant WSDOT input and collaboration into the development of the design. For large projects, the 1:1 meetings are as frequent as once per week, typically lasting from 1 to 2 hours. The Proposers can vet their ideas with WSDOT staff and ask questions to clarify any ambiguities in the RFP. The development of ATCs requires significant effort. The 1:1 meetings allow Proposers to vet the ATC ideas with WSDOT prior to expending that effort. WSDOT may still reject an ATC once it is developed. The early vetting allows WSDOT to guide Proposers in the right direction and steer Proposers away from ATCs that the WSDOT Project Team knows will not be acceptable. WSDOT can use the 1:1 meetings to ask Proposers if there is any portion of the RFP that is unnecessarily increasing the cost of the procurement. WSDOT should respect the Design-Builders’ need to wrap up during last 2 weeks, finish estimates, and produce their proposals. We recommend a quiet period during the last weeks with no addenda or no significant addenda. Finally, we recommend when structuring your internal teams, that members of RFP development and 1:1 meetings transition to contract administration to provide continuity. It is very important that the procurement team respond to questions from each Proposer in a consistent manner. The procurement team should be open and honest about providing information to Proposers to help them better understand project risks, challenges, stakeholder participation, project needs and any other key elements related to making the project a success. Each Proposer should be treated by the procurement team as members of the project team. It is in the best interest of WSDOT to provide open communication to each Proposer to ensure they are able to submit a successful proposal that provides an innovative solution to solving the project needs. The procurement team must respond to Proposer questions and innovative solutions carefully as to not
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-17
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
tip a Proposer that the procurement team has already discussed the issue with another Proposer. Proposers needs to evaluate how they intend to market their proposal to meet the RFP and meet or exceed the project goals. WSDOT’s expectations or preference must be clearly stated in the RFP. Proposals will be evaluated based on criteria found in the RFP/ITP. See Chapter 6 for additional information.
5-8.2.1
Following the Meeting(s)
The PE should recap each 1:1 meeting to determine if there are any action items, make a general assessment as to what items may need an addendum and target a date for the addendum. The PE should also evaluate what resources are needed to process the addendum (technical expertise, etc.). Issues that have the greatest impact to Proposers should be prioritized first, followed by what can reasonably be handled within the period of time available.
5-8.3
Request for Proposal Questions, Clarifications, and Addenda The clarification process allows WSDOT to respond to Proposers’ questions during the RFP advertisement period. See Section 5-7.4 of this manual for discussion on general versus proprietary questions. A response to a general question will be posted on the project webpage for all to see. Responses to clarification questions need to be carefully drafted for consistency and ensure fair competition. Clarification responses are meant to clarify the RFP but should not be used to materially change the RFP. Material changes to the RFP should be modified via the addendum process. The Procurement Manager should ensure that the Proposer wants their question to be posted publicly prior to posting the Q&A on the project website. To ensure confidentiality of the content of a proposal, the Procurement Manager should allow each Proposer to ask confidential questions during 1:1 meetings. All responses to clarification questions need to be approved by the ASCE.
5-8.3.1
Questions
Submitting Deadline is “fill in date and time” from RFQ/RFP. Response Deadline is “fill in date and time” from RFQ/RFP. Submitter/Proposer Questions are provided to the Point of Contact in writing. RFQ Section 3.3 outlines the process for Questions, Clarifications, and Addenda and ITP Section 2.3, Section 2.4 and Section 2.5 for Communications, Questions, and Addenda.
• WSDOT should track formal questions (on a spreadsheet or other tool)
• Responses should generally be one of the following: – Your question will be addressed by addendum – Refer to the RFQ/RFP documents – page/sheet # – Submit in accordance with the RFQ/RFP
• Responses may also include clarifying information
• Responses should not change the intent of the RFQ/RFP
• WSDOT can ask the submitting Submitters/Proposers to rephrase their question
• WSDOT can refuse to answer the question
Page 5-18
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
• Do not give partial answers
• WSDOT may submit formal questions
• The EM and ASCE need to concur with the responses prior to posting
• Submitters/Proposers bring their questions for WSDOT to answer – WSDOT does not offer up solutions, suggestions, or opinions
• In general, WSDOT will share the following information – Redirect to information posted on the WSDOT website (Contract Ad & Award, and project site) – RFQ, RFP, ITP, fact sheet, conceptual plans or potentially any responses to formal questions – Share that detailed technical information is available in the RFQ/RFP/ITP – Restate information that was shared at the Voluntary Submitter/Proposers Meeting
• Provide uniform information to each Submitter/Proposer (if at all possible on the same day)
• WSDOT may need to ask if questions are intended to be a formal question (public) – which will be posted to the Contract Ad & Award site along with a response
5-8.4
Request for Proposal Addenda RFP addenda are generated by clarification questions but can also be generated to modify the contents of the RFP. Proposers begin preparing proposals shortly after the short list is announced. Changes to the RFP often have a major impact on proposals. If a notable addendum needs to be issued less than 2 weeks before the proposal due date, the PE should consider delaying the proposal due date. Please notify Contract Ad & Award whenever a change to the RFP will impact a document submittal date or otherwise require rescheduling of Contract Ad & Award resources. You must also notify Contract Ad & Award each time a change is made to EBASE that needs to be advanced to the bids module (a change to the Price Proposal).
5-8.4.1
Posting Addenda and Formal Question Process
• The PE will notify the EM and ASCE of addenda and formal questions as they are identified
• The WSDOT Project Team will assemble documents and review for spelling, grammar, line and section references, etc. a minimum of 1 day prior to posting to Contract Ad & Award
• The PE will review and comment
• After review, the PE will solicit EM and ASCE approval(s)
• Upon EM/ASCE approval, the WSDOT Project Team will provide the PE a conformed document at the conclusion of the addenda process and send documents to the Contract Ad & Award to be posted and distributed.
• The PE will provide the conformed document(s) to Proposers as a courtesy (they are not contractual) after they are posted to the Contract Ad & Award website
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-19
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
5-8.5
Receipt of Proposal Contract Ad & Award receives all proposals and completes the proposal review using the Proposal Review Checklist. See Chapter 6.
5-8.6
Proposal Evaluation and Determination of the Apparent Best Value Proposer The Evaluation Team performs the evaluation of the proposals. For information on the evaluation process, see Chapter 6.
5-8.6.1
Apparent Best Value Determination
After the Evaluation Team has completed the Evaluation and secured concurrence from the Executive Team, the Project Team and Contract Ad & Award will prepare for the Best Value Determination. The Project Team will send Contract Ad & Award the full evaluation spreadsheet for use at the public opening. Only the sheet with the calculation showing the best value will be shared publicly. Contract Ad & Award will conduct the public opening of the price proposal and the Best Value Determination on the date specified at the link available on the website. Contract Ad & Award will publicly open the price proposals on camera and read the prices and overall scores and announce the Best Value Proposer, second Best Value Proposer and Third Best Value Proposer. After the pubic opening and announcement, Contract Ad & Award will post and distribute the Best Value Determination. Contract Ad & Award will then begin the post-bid opening process which will eventually result in a tabulations of the price proposals being posted and distributed.
5-8.6.2
Protests
Contract Ad & Award will receive and respond to any protests.
5-8.6.3
Contract Award and Execution
After the Apparent Best Value Determination has taken place, Contract Ad & Award will clear the Apparent Best Value Proposer for award and begin preparations to award the contract. If additional information is needed of the proposer, Contract Ad & Award will send a request for pre-award information. This would be done in cases where additional information is needed in order to determine that the Apparent Best Value proposer submitted a responsive proposal. When the request has been satisfied by the contractor, award can move forward. Prior to contract award, the Project Team will need to provide Contract Ad & Award with a list of the agreed-to betterments. It is preferred to verify that the contractor agrees to the betterments identified prior to awarding the contract because once the contract is awarded, it must be executed within 20 days. Contract Ad & Award will conform the Contract Form to the successful proposer and prepare the award documents. Prior to the awarding the contract, the following approvals must be provided:
• Region approval to award
• HQ Construction approval to award Page 5-20
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
• HQ Bridge approval to award
• HQ CPDM funding approval
• FHWA concurrence (only for select PoDi or PoCi projects)
• Other approvals as needed (Contract Ad & Award will notify you) After all approvals are secured, Contract Ad & Award will prepare the award documents and award the contract. This begins the 20 day timeline for execution of the contract. The execution documents will be routed by CAPS and upon the return of the completed and compliant documents the contract will be signed and executed by the Deputy State Construction Engineer. At this point, CAPS will issue the Notice to Proceed.
5-9
Alternative Technical Concepts An ATC is a confidential request by a Proposer to modify a contract requirement, specifically for that Proposer, prior to the proposal due date. The Procurement Manager should encourage Proposers to discuss potential ATC concepts early to ensure that time is not wasted pursuing a concept that is fatally flawed, and to allow WSDOT to help ensure Proposers are aware of any potential challenges in getting an ATC approved. ATCs are evaluated for approval or denial by WSDOT within the deadline set forth in the ITP, which is usually set to occur several weeks before the proposal due date. The Proposer may only incorporate unconditionally approved ATCs into a proposal, but they do not have to include an approved ATC in their proposal. Except as noted herein, any contract requirement can generally be subject to consideration for an ATC. To be approved, an ATC must be deemed, in WSDOT’s sole discretion, to provide a project that is “equal or better” on an overall basis than the project would be without the proposed ATC. Concepts that simply delete scope, lower performance requirements, lower standards, or reduce contract requirements are not acceptable as ATCs. WSDOT generally allows the ATC process for all DB contracts to promote innovation, find the best solutions, and to maintain flexibility in the procurement process.
5-9.1
Submittal To allow sufficient time for review, all proposed ATCs must be submitted to WSDOT no later than the time specified in the ITP. This deadline applies to both initial submissions and revised submissions in response to WSDOT’s comments. Each ATC submittal package shall address the elements required by the ITP. Each of the elements are intended to facilitate one of the following purposes: 1. Help WSDOT understand what is being proposed 2. Help WSDOT understand specifically what changes to the RFP are being requested 3. Establish a firm commitment from the Design-Builder to implement the requested changes 4. Help WSDOT determine whether or not the ATC will provide a project that is “equal or better” on an overall basis to what the project would be without the proposed ATC
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-21
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
At no time during the ATC submittal and review process shall the Proposer disclose any pricing information related to the ATC, including but not limited to, estimated increases or decreases to the Proposer’s Price Proposal, if any. Absent permission from WSDOT, once an ATC is discussed with or submitted to WSDOT, the ATC shall not be disclosed to third parties including other Proposers, and to the extent permitted by law, shall remain confidential until after contract award. WSDOT’s permission to the Proposer prior to the Proposer disclosing ATC information to third parties (such as other governmental agencies that may have an interest in the ATC) is required in order to allow WSDOT to review and either approve or disapprove the ATC.
5-9.2
Review Incomplete ATC submittal packages may be returned to the Proposer without review or comment. WSDOT may, in its sole discretion, request additional information regarding a proposed ATC. WSDOT may, in its sole discretion, deny any ATC. ATCs that do not meet the “equal or better” standard shall be rejected. ATCs that would require excessive time or cost for WSDOT to review, evaluate, or investigate will not be considered. WSDOT will not consider contract cost savings in the “equal or better” determination. This is because (1) doing so could create an unlevel playing field where all Proposers are not bidding on an equivalent project, and (2) there is no way of identifying whether the suggested price benefit actually materialized in the proposal documents. All discussions with Proposers regarding ATCs and information contained in an ATC submittal will remain confidential. Due to the confidential nature of ATCs and the need to respond in a timely manner, the WSDOT Project Manager shall minimize the number of staff involved in the ATC review process. When technical issues and questions arise that are outside the WSDOT Project Team’s expertise, HQ Construction should be consulted. All staff that are to be involved in the review shall sign a confidentiality agreement before beginning the review. WSDOT shall refrain at all times during the ATC submittal review process, including 1:1 meetings, from indicating in any manner to a Proposer that a particular ATC would favorably or unfavorably affect the Proposers technical score. To do so can not only short circuit the proposal evaluation process, but it can also interject the owner’s bias into the proposal process. When measured in terms of the competitive process, this could provide advantages to a single Proposer to the detriment of the remaining Proposers. The Proposer should be advised that, if approved, the ATC will be evaluated in accordance with the ITP. Design analyses, as described in the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01, are not categorically prohibited from consideration in an ATC. In addition, design analyses that are approved for inclusion into an ATC shall not be disclosed to other Proposers until such time as the contract is executed and WSDOT takes full ownership and control of the unsuccessful proposals, which includes the design analysis. Any question that may arise regarding conducting an “apples to apples” comparison of proposals is resolved by requiring the ATC to meet the “equal or better” standard.
Page 5-22
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
The policy notwithstanding, owing to the nature of design analyses, which in and of themselves tend to lower the functionality of the project, meeting the “equal or better” standard will be difficult. Matters that are specifically not eligible for approval as an ATC include the following: 1. Concepts that are not deemed, in WSDOT’s sole discretion, to meet the “equal or better” criteria (as stated above, concepts that simply delete scope, lower performance requirements, lower standards, or reduce contract requirements are not acceptable as ATCs). When making this determination, consider the project as a whole. Ask the following question: “Is the project with this ATC ‘equal or better’ than the project without the ATC?” 2. Any change that would require excessive time or cost for WSDOT review, evaluation, or investigation WSDOT reserves the right in its sole discretion to reject any ATC.
5-9.3
WSDOT Response WSDOT will respond to each Proposer within the timeframe stipulated in the ITP. The WSDOT Project Manager shall obtain written approval from the State Construction Engineer or his delegate, and Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) concurrence as appropriate on Federal oversight contracts, prior to providing a final response to an ATC. The format for the response should include the ATC number, brief description, and shall be limited to one of the designated responses provided in the ITP.
5-9.4
Incorporating Alternative Technical Concepts into the Proposal A Proposer has the option to include any or all unconditionally approved ATCs in its proposal and the proposal price should reflect such incorporated ATCs. If WSDOT returned an ATC stating that certain conditions must be met prior to granting approval, the Proposer must satisfy the stated conditions and obtain WSDOT’s unconditional approval of the ATC prior to incorporating the ATC in the proposal. Except for approved ATCs, the proposal shall not otherwise contain exceptions to or variations from the requirements of the RFP. WSDOT will not advise Proposers on whether or not to include ATCs in their proposals in that such a practice can lead to claims of favoritism thereby resulting in an increased likely hood of a bid protest.
5-9.5
Evaluating Alternative Technical Concepts in the Proposal To avoid potential conflicts and ensure the objectivity of the evaluation process, WSDOT employees or consultants that participate in pre-proposal 1:1 meetings with Proposers shall not participate in the evaluation of the proposals. Once an approved ATC is included in a proposal, it is the responsibility of the Evaluation Team to determine how the ATC fits within the evaluation criteria. Technical scoring shall be the sole province of the Evaluation Team and shall be based solely on the scoring criteria in the ITP.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-23
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
5-9.6
WSDOT Use of Concepts Contained in an Alternative Technical Concept By submitting a proposal in compliance with the ITP, all unsuccessful Proposers acknowledge that upon payment of the designated stipend, all ATC incorporated into a proposal, shall become the property of WSDOT without restriction on use.
5-10
Security and Confidentiality
5-10.1
Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement and No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavit The most important pieces of the DB procurement process are confidentiality and impartiality. Whether it be development of the RFQ (such as project goals), the RFP (elements of the conceptual plans), or the actual evaluations of SOQs and proposals, confidentiality and impartiality are of utmost importance. This is to ensure that no DB Teams submitting SOQs and proposals could have an unfair advantage by obtaining “inside information” about the proposed project that other firms would not have access to or by receiving an evaluation tainted by conflicts of interest. At the Evaluation Kick-Off Meeting, prior to the start of the evaluation, the Facilitator will inform the Evaluation Team, and all others present in the evaluation room, of the importance of confidentiality safeguards. The Facilitator will verify the submission of a Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement (Appendix X) and a No-Conflict of Interest Affidavit (Appendix X) from each Evaluation Team member. The Management Team will resolve indications of real, apparent, perceived, or possible conflicts of interest. If a conflict cannot be resolved, the individual involved will be removed from the evaluation process. The submissions of the Confidentiality and NonDisclosure Agreements and No Conflict of Interest Affidavits to the Facilitator will become part of the evaluation record. After the Evaluation Kick-Off Meeting, all individuals involved in the evaluation process will be responsible for maintaining confidentiality.
5-10.1.1
(RFQ) Voluntary Submitters/Proposers Meeting:
The Voluntary Submitters Meeting really has no expectation of confidentiality. Clarifications or questions answered (unless trivial, at the PE’s discretion) would typically be published on the project website. See Chapter 6 for additional information.
5-10.1.2
(RFP) One on One Meetings:
Unlike the Voluntary Submitters Meeting, the discussions and content of the 1:1 meetings are highly confidential. For details on these 1:1 meetings, see Chapter 6 for additional information.
Page 5-24
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
5-10.2
Chapter 5
Security of Work Area The Facilitator will secure a private meeting room for all group reviews, evaluations, and discussions pertaining to the evaluation. Only the Evaluation Team will be authorized admittance to this area. For details on Security of Work Area. See Chapter 6 for additional information.
5-10.3
Documentation Control Authorized personnel should directly control and keep secured all SOQ and proposal evaluation documentation at the end of each day. Adherence to the procedures in this manual as it relates to safeguarding and storing of confidential documentation is of utmost importance. Do not store computer files on drives accessible to others. All computer-generated data will be securely stored on drives accessible only to those on the Evaluation Team or the individual Evaluation Team member (such as personal drives). At the conclusion of the evaluation process, the Evaluation Team will not retain any part of the SOQs or proposals. All work must remain in the project specific evaluation file, clear of any notations or markings by the Evaluation Team. Remember it is the intent of WSDOT to remain paperless during this process.
5-10.4
Information Release No information regarding the contents of the SOQs/proposals, members of the Evaluation Team, deliberations by the Evaluation Team, or other information relating to the evaluation process shall be released (except to authorized persons) or publicly disclosed without WSDOT executive authorization. It is particularly important that any information designated as “proprietary or confidential” by any Proposer be carefully guarded to avoid its inadvertent release.
5-11
Roles and Responsibilities
5-11.1
Responsibilities of the Contract Ad & Award Office See Chapter 6 for the roles and responsibilities of the Project Management Team.
5-11.2
Project Management Team See Chapter 6 for the roles and responsibilities of the Project Management Team.
5-11.3
Region Executive Team See Chapter 6 for the roles and responsibilities of the Region Executive Team.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-25
Chapter 5
5-11.4
General Procurement Activities
Headquarters Executive Team The HQ Executive Team consists of the Assistant Secretary for Regional and Mega Programs/Chief Engineer, the Assistant Secretary for Multimodal Development & Delivery, the Director of Construction/State Construction Engineer, and the Deputy State Construction Engineer. If appropriate, consider including the State Design Engineer, Environmental Services Office (ESO), and Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) to the above list of participants.
5-11.5
WSDOT Project Engineer The WSDOT PE is responsible for ensuring the timely progress of the evaluation and coordinating any consensus meetings or re-evaluations. To the extent that the WSDOT PE determines it appropriate, the WSDOT PE may deviate from any procedure as prescribed herein as long as said deviations do not otherwise constitute a violation of applicable law. Any such deviation must be documented and addressed in the presentation to the Management Team. The WSDOT PE is Responsible for scheduling oral debriefing sessions with the Submitters/Proposers (in accordance with the ITP). The WSDOT PE selects the Evaluators. If an Evaluation Team member is unable to complete their evaluation responsibilities to the extent the WSDOT PE determines necessary, or if additional Evaluators or Technical Advisors are necessary to evaluate the Technical Proposals more completely, the WSDOT PE will take the required steps necessary to arrange for substitution or supplementation of evaluation personnel. The WSDOT PE will facilitate the participation of Observers, as may be necessary during the course of the evaluation process.
5-11.6
Technical Point of Contact A Technical Point of Contact is identified to Submitters/Proposers in the RFQ and the RFP documents. The Technical Point of Contact is available for questions and clarifications during the processes. Often this role is filled by the WSDOT PE. The Technical Point of Contact cannot be an Evaluator.
5-11.7
Assistant State Construction Engineer The ASCE provides HQ oversight of the entire procurement process, including:
• Provides input on goal setting, scoring, and development of the RFQ, participates in the Voluntary Submitters Meeting, and the SOQ Evaluations as the HQ Observer. Reviews and approves the RFQ prior to advertisement.
• Provides input on the development of the RFP and Information to Proposers (ITP), scoring, participates in the 1:1 meetings, and the proposal evaluations as the HQ Observer. Reviews and approves the ITP/RFP prior to advertisement. Reviews Q&A and addendums prior to posting.
• After the apparent best value Proposer is announced, continues oversight of the award and contract administration of the project.
Page 5-26
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
5-11.8
Chapter 5
Procurement Support/ Request for Qualifications /Request for Proposal Coordinator
• Responsible for ensuring the timely progress of the evaluation
• Responsible for scheduling oral debriefing sessions with the Submitters/Proposers (in accordance with the ITP).
• The PE works with region leadership to select Evaluators and an alternate, in the event of an Evaluator being unable to complete their evaluation responsibilities.
• Scheduling Technical Advisors necessary to evaluate the Technical Proposals
• The WSDOT PE will facilitate the participation of Observers, as may be necessary during the course of the evaluation process. For more information on Roles and Responsibilities, see Chapter 6.
5-12
Design-Build Delivery Interface with Other Processes DB delivery is unique in the way in which it interfaces with many processes that are integral parts of WSDOT transportation projects. Primary among those are environmental processes, FHWA processes and WSDOT internal administrative processes. This section identifies key elements of interfaces between those three processes and DB delivery, primarily through the use of flowcharts.
5-12.1
Environmental Processes Environmental interface is important throughout the development and execution of DB delivery. Most all significant transportation projects include elements of risk associated with the environmental conditions. As a result, environmental conditions play a role in the selection of the appropriate method of delivery, the initial project development, the development of the RFP, the procurement process, and ultimately the implementation of the project. Federal regulations establish the parameters by which State departments of transportation may deliver projects using DB (23 CFR Part 636). For environmental aspects of the regulation, see Chapter 1. Per guidance from FHWA, WSDOT has established a standard of practice that typically includes the issuance of an RFP on DB projects after the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process has been completed and a decision document has been signed. Exceptions to this practice should be carefully considered. If the NEPA process has not been completed prior to the issuance of an RFP, the solicitation document must include a notification of the status of the NEPA review and a statement that no commitments are to be made to any of the NEPA alternatives currently under consideration, including the no-build alternative. WSDOT must receive prior FHWA concurrence before issuing the RFP, per 23 CFR 636.109. When a specific DB project is developed within the limits of a previously completed NEPA decision document, it is not uncommon for the design development of the project to vary somewhat from the preferred alternative of the NEPA decision document. In those
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-27
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
instances, it may be determined that a formal environmental reevaluation needs to be completed prior to the issuance of the RFP to determine the requirements for the final NEPA approvals. When an environmental reevaluation is necessary, its processes must be carefully determined and integrated into the design development procurement schedule for the project as it can often dictate the critical path of the project schedule. It is not uncommon for Design-Builders to develop designs that are not fully consistent with the final NEPA decision documents, usually as a result of ATCs. If the DesignBuilder designs or constructs the project in such a way that causes different impacts to the environment or surrounding communities, additional NEPA/State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) documentation may be required. If required, the Design-Builder shall be responsible for providing additional information/data necessary to support WSDOT’s NEPA/SEPA analysis. In addition, the Design-Builder shall pay all costs and accept all responsibility for any schedule delays associated with updating or securing the additional environmental approvals. WSDOT will coordinate with all applicable agencies as part of any environmental documentation process. In situations where the NEPA process had not been completed prior to the award of a DB contract, the Design-Builder’s specific responsibilities concerning NEPA approvals and associated environmental permitting processes must be clearly defined in the RFP and contract documents. The process requires the Design-Builder to closely coordinate with WSDOT. The DB contract must include termination provisions in the event that the no-build alternative is selected. The DB contract must also include appropriate provisions preventing the Design-Builder from proceeding with final design activities and physical construction prior to the completion of the NEPA process (WSDOT uses a two phase Notice to Proceed to comply with this requirement).
5-12.2
Federal Highway Administration Processes Although not all WSDOT DB projects include Federal funding, the interface with DB projects and the FHWA is an important component of the delivery method. WSDOT and FHWA have jointly developed the Washington State Department of Transportation FederalAid Highway Program Stewardship and Oversight Agreement, which defines how they will work together to provide project and program oversight. For more information on FHWA processes, see Chapter 10.
5-13
Debriefs The debrief process is a valuable part of WSDOT’s DB program. The debrief process consists to two basic parts: debriefing internally with the Management, Region, and HQ Executive Teams, and externally with the Submitters/Proposers. WSDOT continues to improve its DB Program and the debrief process is one way WSDOT gathers input on how we can improve and WSDOT shares input on how the Submitters/Proposers can improve. The internal debrief process is used to gain concurrence on the Evaluation Team’s score and assessment of the SOQs and proposals.
Page 5-28
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
The external debrief process is a coordinated effort with our industry partners. Our industry partners have continued to say that they appreciate the feedback, positive and negative, and value the transparency that WSDOT creates by holding these meetings and that we incorporate them into our DB procurement process. The debrief process is integral to, and a continuation of, WSDOT’s SOQ and proposal evaluation and scoring efforts. The Information that we discuss comes directly from the SOQ and proposal evaluation as well as the procurement documents.
5-13.1
Evaluation – Key Points The input on the evaluation and scoring forms comes directly from the Evaluation Team. The Evaluation Team should be encouraged to provide feedback to the Submitters/ Proposers about their SOQ/proposal content, how the information was presented, did they address the contractual requirements (how were project goals addressed), was the SOQ/proposal clearly written, etc. This information is critical to both the internal and external debriefs to demonstrate that the evaluation process for fair, consistent, and followed WSDOT’s processes. Strong SOQs/proposals assume that the Evaluation Team is not familiar to WSDOT. SOQs/proposals should stand-alone, be complete, and not leave questions for the Evaluators to make assumptions on what the Submitter/Proposer meant. SOQs/proposals should tell the readers how their experience or approach relates to the project goals. The Evaluation Team should not have to make assumptions or rely on their own experience. The Evaluation Team should provide thoughtful comments. The Evaluation Team should present these comments in a positive way. The Facilitator should be helping the Evaluation Team to record this feedback on the scoring spreadsheets. The Evaluation Team should make sure their comments support the score that has been chosen for each section. The supporting information should be reviewed at all levels of WSDOT and revised as needed to make sure the written comments support the score. It may require being more specific in a comment and indicating why the Evaluation Team determined this score was appropriate.
5-13.2
Incorporating Reference Feedback Reference checks are an important and integrated piece of the evaluation process. Reference reviews should be consistent and should be a group effort. How to incorporate reference feedback: 1. Never use reference names in a comment 2. An appropriate comment might read like – “Reference checks support an evaluation in the Excellent” range”; or, “Reference checks indicated that the WSDOT Project Manager did not collaborate well to solve contract issues” 3. Other references than those listed may be used. If asked, we should tell the Submitter that other references were contacted.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-29
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
5-13.3
Incorporating Statement of Qualifications and Proposal Comments When possible be specific and incorporate page and figure references. This information will help the teams relate to specific issues or items of work. The comments should be related to what WSDOT is asking for in the RFQ or ITP. The comments should support the score that is shown and provide documentation from the proposals.
5-13.4
Getting Ready for Debrief Sessions
5-13.4.1
General Items
The comment sheets should be reviewed and proofread to ensure there are no typos, no grammatical errors, there are no personal or derogatory comments, there are no personal opinions, and that all comments comply with the terms of the contract.
5-13.4.2
Internal Debriefs
Determine who the WSDOT representatives will be. The WSDOT Project Team will select whom they want to present the evaluation results. It is important that the person(s) presenting have knowledge of the contract and evaluation process. These debrief meetings are fairly short, typically no longer that a half-hour and are supported by previously distributed evaluation material and scoring results. Due to the DB paperless process, paper handout should not be use. For an in person meeting, you should have a presentation. If for any reason handouts are provide in hard copy, collected and destroyed. These debrief meetings will need to be scheduled several months in advance with WSDOT executives and in time to support the overall project schedule. The WSDOT Project Team needs to determine whether or not to hold these debriefs in person; an in person meeting is not necessary. The Evaluation Team should be invited and encouraged to provide the support as well. All HQ staff listed below should receive an invitation to the debrief meeting. The bolded titles in the list are considered the core meeting group, so the date and time of the meeting should be determined based on those individuals’ schedule.
• Assistant Secretary Regions and Mega Programs,
• Assistant Secretary of Urban Mobility & Access
• Deputy Assistant Secretary Mega Projects
• Deputy Assistant Secretary Multimodal Development and Delivery
• State Construction Engineer (Director of Construction Division)
• Deputy State Construction Engineer
• Lead Construction Engineer, Projects
• Lead Construction Engineer, Administration
• ASCE supporting the project
Page 5-30
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
General Procurement Activities
Chapter 5
• State Design-Build Program Manager
• State Design-Build Engineer
• Procurement Manager/PE/Point of Contact During the Internal Debrief Meeting:
• Agenda
• It is strongly encouraged that practice sessions be used to prepare the presenter for these debrief sessions. Each WSDOT Project Team will need to make their own decision on how they will get prepared to present to Region and HQ Executive Teams.
• Never compare one proposal to another, one Proposer to another, or one key person to another
• You are not defending the Evaluation Team’s score. That is not the purpose of the meeting.
• You need to be prepared to describe the process and why the Evaluation Team scored the way that they did. The assumption is that the Evaluation Team reached agreement on the scores and that the process was fair and consistent.
5-13.5
External Debriefs For the RFQ, Contract Ad & Award will email each successful Submitter an “Invitation to Submit Proposal” notification and include their scoring summary and summarized Evaluator comments of their SOQ. Submitters who did not make the short list are notified that they did not make the short list and are sent their scoring summary and summarized Evaluator comments of their SOQ. For the RFP, within 7 calendar days after the announcement of Apparent Best Value Proposer, WSDOT will email each Proposer the scoring summary and summarized Evaluator comments of their proposal. PE’s Office should determine who the WSDOT representatives will be. There should always be two WSDOT staff in the meeting. It is highly recommended that one person be someone who was a member of the Evaluation Team and one at a management level that can speak to policy issues if needed. It is suggested that at least one person be at EM level or above. Be prepared to schedule debriefs as quickly as possible after protest period is complete (Exhibit 5-2). Suggest allowing for a least one hour. This length of time should provide the opportunity for a good conversation and to answer any questions the Submitters/ Proposers may have. Please note that the amount/type of information provided is different for internal and external debriefs.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Page 5-31
Chapter 5
General Procurement Activities
Do have the summary scores for all Submitters. This information is OK to share. It is not appropriate to share Submitter’s name with their scores. Make sure have available the SOQ or proposal for that specific Submitter/Proposer. During the External Debrief Meeting:
• Remember you are providing feedback to Submitters/Proposers that reflects on their hard work. Feedback should be presented in a positive manner that will help lead them to lessons learned and to make improvements on their next submittals, whether they are the successful team on not
• See list of prompt questions to help get prepared
• Never indicate who the Evaluators or references were
• Never compare one proposal to another, one team to another, or one key person to another
• You are not defending the Evaluation Team’s score. That is not the purpose of the meeting.
• You need to be prepared to describe the process and why the Evaluation Team scored the way that they did. The Evaluation Team reached agreement on the scores and that the process was fair and consistent.
• You should prepare a short agenda to help guide the meeting – suggested topics might include: 1. Introductions 2. Safety Briefing 3. Hand out the comment forms and allow time to review 4. Overall assessment of the Submitter or Proposer and where they scored (this is your chance to summarize the Evaluation Team’s comments) 5. Highlight several key areas form evaluations – positive and negative 6. Open discussion or dialog
• Remember the debrief meetings are for the Submitters or Proposers so the meeting should really be managed so that they get what they need
• Never offer an opinion about your thoughts about the strengths or weaknesses of a particular teaming partner
5-13.6
Summary or Closing Thank the Submitter or Proposer for their interest and participation and encourage them to submit on future WSDOT DB projects. Let them know about any upcoming work and encourage them to stay engaged with WSDOT. Let them know about ways to get involved or to stay in touch:
• Project/program webpages
• HQ DB office and their resources
• WSDOT/AGC/ACEC Committees
• Offer follow up meetings as needed
Page 5-32
Design-Build Manual M 3126.07 
Chapter 6 6-1
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Introduction This chapter provides the methodology and procedures for evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQs) received in response to the Request for Qualifications (RFQ) and proposals received in response to Request for Proposal (RFP). The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidance to ensure the impartial, equitable, and comprehensive evaluation of each SOQ and proposal, in accordance with the RFQ and RFP requirements.
6-1.1
Transparency It is imperative for all the parties involved in a design-build project that the evaluation process be fair, equitable, and transparent. The evaluation process should clearly communicate how WSDOT establishes the short list from the SOQs and how WSDOT determines the Proposer’s technical score. The following list of recommendations should be followed:
• Clearly state the evaluation criteria and score/technical credits given for each item related to identified project goals and ensure that the Evaluation Team understands them.
• Clearly state the requirements of the RFQ and RFP including what will be considered a non-responsive submittal.
• Clearly state the requirements of the RFQ and RFP including what will be considered a strength, weaknesses, and neutral response.
• Do not seek from Proposers the number or dollar amount of changes on past projects constructed by them.
• In the proposal phase, give equal opportunity for each short-listed Submitter to converse with representatives of the WSDOT project team to clarify their proposal and any of the requirements of the RFP.
• Provide debriefs for the industry following the announcement of the short listed Submitters and the Apparent Best Value Proposed team. For more information on both internal and external debriefs reference Chapter 5. This list is based on several cases in alternative contracting methods for public works projects nationwide where the award was successfully protested because the evaluation plan was unclear and overly subjective. Award protests and their subsequent project delays are avoidable if the agency invests the upfront resources necessary to develop a fair, equitable, and, perhaps most importantly, transparent evaluation process with which to select the best apparent value from among several competing proposals.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-1
Chapter 6
6-1.2
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Scoring Systems WSDOT uses both an adjectival and numerical evaluation and scoring methodology for design-build projects as a key part of its reproducible scoring process. If a project team requests to use an alternative to this methodology, it must gain approval from the Assistant State Construction Engineer (ASCE) before proceeding. The adjectival rating methodology is described in other Sections of this chapter.
6-1.3
Evaluation Methods WSDOT has two evaluation methods. The first evaluation method requires each Evaluation Team member to use the Qualitative Evaluation Form to record Strengths and Weakness and individual comments. The second evaluation method uses the SOQ or Proposal PDF to identify Strengths and Weakness and record individual evaluation comments within the PDF. If the comment in the RFF method is used, the Facilitator must:
• Ensure each evaluator has two full-sized monitors.
• Ensure each evaluator has Adobe Acrobat Pro DC
• Assign highlight color to each evaluator
• Show how to use Adobe DC “Highlight” tool to highlight strengths and weaknesses and comment in their Proposal PDF.
• States the comment format is “Goal <dash> Comment and Justification <period> strength or weakness value in accordance with Exhibit 6-3 Strengths and Weaknesses Assessment Table”
• If this comment identifies a Betterment the format should include the capital letter “B” at the end of the format. Both method must use the Qualitative Evaluation Form to record the final comments and scores. The Qualitative Evaluation Form is the official evaluation record.
6-1.4
Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement (Agreement), and No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavit (Affidavit) Prior to the start of the SOQ and RFP evaluation, at or before the evaluation kickoff meeting, the Facilitator will inform the Evaluation Team of the importance of confidentiality safeguards. Refer to the WSDOT Organizational Conflicts of Interest Manual M 3043 for guidance on confidentiality and non-disclosure requirements and nonconflicts of interest affidavits. The Project Management Team will mitigate indications of real, apparent, or perceived conflicts of interest. If a conflict cannot be mitigated, the individual involved will be removed from the evaluation process. The submissions of the Agreements and Affidavits to the Facilitator from the evaluation team will become part of the evaluation record. After the evaluation kick-off meeting, all individuals involved in the evaluation process will be responsible for maintaining confidentiality.
Page 6-2
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
6-1.5
Chapter 6
Information Release No information regarding the contents of the SOQs/Proposals, Evaluation Team member identities (including Technical Advisors), deliberations by the Evaluation Team, or other information relating to the evaluation process shall be released (except to authorized persons) or publicly disclosed unless otherwise provided for by statute or regulation. It is particularly important that any information designated as “proprietary or confidential” by any Proposer be carefully guarded to avoid its inadvertent release.
6-1.6
Security of Work Area The Facilitator will secure a private meeting room or virtual workspace that can be locked and secured for all group reviews, evaluations, and discussions pertaining to the evaluation (e.g., covering windows). Only the Evaluation Team and personnel approved by the Project Engineer, will be authorized admittance or access to this area or media platform. The Facilitator must provide justification to the Project Engineer for additions to the Evaluation Team. If a situation arises that requires an individual who is not an Evaluation Team member to enter the evaluation area or invited to collaborate via the virtual media platform, discussions will discontinue and all records must be properly stored or safeguarded. This safeguard is to remain in effect until the individual has departed the work area. The Facilitator must ensure that the identity of the evaluators is kept confidential. The Evaluation Team will ensure their evaluation is done in secure private location. For virtual meetings, attendees shall ensure that their work area is private so that confidentiality can be maintained.
6-1.7
Documentation Control Depending upon the phase of evaluation, the Facilitator will give access to a secure, permission-restricted location to each Evaluation Team member so they can evaluate each SOQ or Proposal. For no reason should the SOQ or Proposal be printed or emailed. During independent evaluation of SOQs, proposals, and evaluation materials, each Evaluation Team member will maintain and ensure confidentiality by securing all of the materials under his/her direct control from others not associated with the Evaluation Team. All materials must be saved in a designated, secure, permission restricted, location. During group evaluations, the Facilitator should directly control and secure all documentation at the end of each day. Adherence to the procedures in this chapter as it relates to safeguarding and storing of confidential documentation is of utmost importance. Do not store computer files on drives accessible to others. All materials must be saved in a designated, secure, permission restricted, location accessible only to those on the Evaluation Team. At the conclusion of each evaluation process, the Evaluation Team will not retain any draft or any part of the SOQ or Proposal evaluation materials. All work must be retained in the project specific evaluation file. The Evaluation Team can make marks, or comments on their individual electronic copies of SOQs/proposals.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-3
Chapter 6
6-1.8
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Potential Evaluators List This list in the Design-Build Resources folder on the Design-Build Program’s SharePoint site provides names of potential evaluators. This list is searchable by region, name, title, training, experience as an unofficial observer, and experience as a past evaluator. All evaluators should be an Assistant Project Engineers or above. Every evaluator should complete both SOQ Evaluation and Proposal Evaluation Trainings. Best practice is to have at least one of the evaluators have previous experience as an unofficial observer or an evaluator on a previous design-build project. This list will assist in narrowing down potential evaluators.
6-2
Roles and Responsibilities The SOQ and Proposal Evaluation Team members include a Facilitator, Evaluators, Technical Advisors, and an Observer. The following are the general roles and responsibilities for the Evaluation Team during the both the SOQ and proposal evaluation phase:
6-2.1
Facilitator The Facilitator may be the Project Engineer or Procurement Specialist. Titles may vary by region.
• Ensures that procedures as prescribed in this manual are followed
• Coordinates with the Project Engineer to determine who will be Evaluation Team members, inclusive of Technical Advisors and Observers
• Develops evaluation schedule
• Provides CAA list of Evaluation Team members for access to the secure Book11, Evaluations in the ECM
• Coordinates with the Information Technology Division (ITD) access restricted folders created for confidential information
• Determine the evaluation method to use
• Develops the Qualitative Evaluation Form
• Ensures Evaluation Team is trained on evaluation method
• Ensure Evaluation Team has the necessary equipment and software to use the desire evaluation method
• Schedules and facilitates the evaluation kick-off meeting, evaluations, and debrief meetings with the Project Management, Region Executive, and HQ Executive Teams
• Schedules reference phone calls and invites Technical Advisors, as necessary, for team evaluations.
• Provides a list of each Submitter’s team members (Key Personnel and Major Participants) to the Evaluation Team
• Ensures each Evaluation Team member completes a Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement and a No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavit.
Page 6-4
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Chapter 6
• Collects and records the Agreement and Affidavit on a simple tracking list. This list is needed to support the Proposers’ one-on-one meetings confidentiality. The list is created at the start of the project and supports additions as other reviewers and executives are included in the project. The benefit of the list is that it reminds the Facilitator to ensure they have a conversation with each new person added and to reinforce the need for confidentiality and that no outside conversations or reviews can occur.
• Serves as a point of contact if an Evaluation Team member has questions or encounters problems relative to the evaluations
• Ensures the timely progress of the evaluation and coordinates any consensus meetings or re-evaluations
• Identifies backup Evaluators or Technical Advisors as necessary to evaluate the SOQs or proposals
• Requests approval from the ASCE regarding any deviations from the procedures prescribed in this chapter
• Schedule internal debriefs with Project Management, Region Executive, and HQ Executive Teams
• Summarizes the final evaluation comments and technical scores in the Qualitative Evaluation Form
• Presents the evaluation summary to the Project Management, Region Executive, and HQ Executive Teams at the internal debriefs
• Coordinates with Contract Ad & Award Office (CAA)
• Prepares Apparent Best Value Determination spreadsheet and submits it to CAA
• Maintains all evaluation records
• Provides the Qualitative Evaluation Form to CAA
• Provides to CAA anonymous total scores of each Submitter/Proposer
• Schedules external debriefing sessions with the Proposers (in accordance with the Instructions to Proposers (ITP))
• Protect the identities of the Evaluators
6-2.2
Evaluators Evaluators should be the same individuals for both the SOQ and the Proposal evaluation phases. There are usually three Evaluators, consisting of individuals in the position of Assistant Project Engineer, Project Engineer, or Engineering Manager. The individuals who serve as Evaluators should have a broad range of experience in both design and construction. Typically, one of the Evaluators is familiar with the project and the other two Evaluators are from outside the WSDOT Project Team. In addition, one Evaluator is typically from outside the Region.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-5
Chapter 6
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
The Technical Point of Contact identified in the RFQ/RFP is prohibited from being an Evaluator.
• Completes and executes a Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement and a No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavit and submits completed and executed forms to the Facilitator
• Takes all required trainings
• Accepts meeting requests and commits ample time to evaluate both the SOQs and the Proposals – both for individual review and evaluation time and for group evaluation and scoring
• Reviews the Qualitative Evaluation Forms, RFQ, ITP, and any RFP Technical Requirements sections and appendices related to the submittal requirements as provided by the Facilitator
• Evaluates individually the SOQs and Proposals, recording evaluation comments on the Qualitative Evaluation Form (or alternative method as instructed by the Facilitator), and assessing strengths and weaknesses of each provided comment compared to the technical criteria elements and goals outlined in the RFQ and RFP.
• Documents the reasons for strengths and weaknesses. Comments must be specific and not generalized. Section references will be included with the provided comment to support an assessment.
• Identifies questions regarding any Technical Requirements that require a Technical Advisor response and communicates this need to the Facilitator. The questions and subsequent responses shall be coordinated through the Facilitator and shared in an ‘open forum’ where all the Evaluators are present. This can be done via an email, teleconference, MS Teams (or equivalent), or waiting until the in-the-room evaluation meeting.
• Works with other Evaluators and Facilitator to combine similar comments and delete irrelevant comments. Deliberates on and reach consensus on each comment, strength/weakness assessment, and determination of numerical scores.
• As an Evaluation Team member, meets with each Technical Advisor in the proposal evaluation phase to receive input and recommendations to develop adjectival ratings for each Technical Proposal section. – Upon completion of the discussion with the Technical Advisors, the Evaluators agree on an adjectival rating and numerical score for each Technical Proposal section using the adjectival systems described in the ITP.
• May participate in meetings with the Project Management, Region Executive, and HQ Executive Teams to review the scoring of both evaluation phases.
Page 6-6
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
6-2.3
Chapter 6
Technical Advisor Technical Advisors may be used during the evaluation of both the SOQs and the proposals.
• Reviews the RFQ RFP, ITP, and any Technical Requirements sections related to the proposal evaluation
• Reviews specific technical sections of the proposal, using the directed evaluation method recording individual comments, and assessing strengths and weaknesses of each technical criteria element. Reasons for strengths and weaknesses will be thoroughly documented and comments will be specific and not a generalization. Proposal section references will be included to support each assessment.
• Presents their recommendations and supporting logic to Evaluators at a scheduled proposal evaluation meeting.
• Responds to questions from the Evaluation Team (via the Facilitator) during the SOQ and Proposal evaluation periods.
6-2.4
Office of Equal Opportunity Technical Advisor The Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) has responsibility for ensuring that Federal and State civil rights program requirements are being met per Federal and State laws and statutes. Inclusive of the programs are Title VI, Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE), Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Compliance. For Federal-aid projects, OEO will review all submitted DBE performance plans in accordance with the following process:
• Project Facilitator notifies HQ OEO that DBE Performance Plan reviews are required.
• HQ OEO will assign the reviews to OEO region personnel.
• Region OEO personnel sign Confidentiality and Non- Disclosure Agreement and a No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavit.
• Project Facilitator provides DBE Performance Plans to Region OEO personnel.
• Region OEO personnel review the RFP sections related to the Proposal evaluation (specifically those sections related to the DBE Performance Plan)
• Region OEO personnel review performance plans (5 days).
• Region OEO personnel identify strengths and weaknesses as identified in DBM Section 6-2.3, Technical Advisor.
• Region OEO personnel determine Adjectival Rating.
• Region OEO personnel provide Qualitative Evaluation Form and Adjectival Rating to Project Facilitator.
• Project Facilitator merges the contents of the OEO completed Qualitative Evaluation Form into the Summary Qualitative Evaluation Form, including the Adjectival Rating, and provides it to the Evaluation Team during in the room evaluations.
• Evaluation Team use Summary Qualitative Evaluation Form and Adjectival Rating to evaluate the DBE Participation Project Goal and determine applicable percentage within the Adjectival Rating to calculate technical scores.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-7
Chapter 6
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
• Evaluation Team use the OEO determined Adjectival Rating, subject to outcome of the Disagreement Resolution process, and calculates technical scores. – Disagreement Resolution: If the Evaluation Team takes exception to the Adjectival Rating or the supporting comments, or identifies a deviation from the ITP, the ASCE observer will review the circumstance and attempt to resolve between the OEO personnel and the Project Facilitator. – If the ASCE is unable to facilitate a resolution, then the ASCE and Project Facilitator will present the issue to the OEO Director and the Deputy State Construction Engineer for resolution.
6-2.5
Observer The Observer is the ASCE for the project or their designee.
• Ensures that appropriate evaluation records are being maintained by the Facilitator
• Ensures that all approved evaluation processes and procedures are followed
• Reviews the RFQ, SOQ, ITP, the RFP, and the Technical Proposals
• Attends any part of the SOQ and Technical Proposals evaluation meeting and provides input to the Evaluation Team and Technical Advisors regarding evaluation processes and procedures
• Does not provide input regarding the qualitative evaluations or scoring.
6-2.6
Project Management Team The Management Team consists of the Engineering Managers (design and construction) and the Program Director/Assistant Regional Administrator and/or their Deputies. The Management Team will participate in an Evaluation Debrief Meeting to discuss the submitted SOQs/Proposals and the evaluation forms completed by the Evaluators in connection with their review and scoring of the SOQs/Proposals. During the Evaluation Debrief Meeting, the Facilitator will present the evaluation results to the Management Team. The Evaluation Team will have the opportunity to explain their evaluations to the Management Team. The Management Team:
• Participates in an evaluation debrief meeting to discuss the SOQs/Proposals and the evaluation forms completed by the Evaluators
• Reviews the summary page of the Qualitative Evaluation Form, asks questions, and provides comments
• Participates in evaluation debrief meetings with Region Executive and HQ Executive Teams
• Provides concurrence of the evaluation process to the Region Executive Team
• Recommends approval of the evaluation process to the Region Executive Team
Page 6-8
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
6-2.7
Chapter 6
Region Executive Team Region Executive Team may be comprised of the Region Administrator, Deputy Region Administrator, and Assistant Region Administrator. The Region Executive Team will participate in an Evaluation Debrief Meeting to review the recommendations of the Management Team regarding the proposed short list/ Technical Scores. The Region Executive Team:
• Participates in an evaluation debrief meeting to discuss the SOQs/Proposals and the evaluation forms completed by the Evaluators
• Reviews the summary page of the Qualitative Evaluation Form, asks questions, and provides comments
• Participates in evaluation debrief meetings with Project Management and HQ Executive Teams
• Provides concurrence of the evaluation process to the HQ Executive Team
• Recommends approval of the evaluation process to the HQ Executive Team
6-2.8
Headquarters Executive Team HQ Executive Team may include the State Construction Engineer (Director of Construction Division), Assistant Secretary Regions and Mega Programs, Deputy Assistant Secretary Mega Projects, Deputy Assistant Secretary Multimodal Development and Delivery, Deputy State Construction Engineer, Lead Construction Engineer, Projects Lead Construction Engineer, Administration, ASCE supporting the project, , State Design-Build Program Manager, State Design-Build Engineer. If appropriate, consider including the State Design Engineer, Environmental Services Office (ESO), and OEO to the above list of participants. The Facilitator will develop an Executive Summary of the evaluations and make a presentation to the HQ Executive Team for approval. The HQ Executive Team will participate in an Evaluation Debrief Meeting to review the recommendations of the Region Executive Team regarding the proposed short list/ Technical Scores. The HQ Executive Team:
• Participates in an evaluation debrief meeting to discuss the SOQs/Proposals and the evaluation forms completed by the Evaluators
• Reviews the summary page of the Qualitative Evaluation Form, asks questions, and provides comments
• Provides final approval of the evaluation process
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-9
Chapter 6
6-2.9
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Contract Ad & Award Office CAA is coordinated with throughout all phases of the design build procurement. Creates the DB Project Page on Public Works Website.
• Manages all DB Procurements documents on the Public Works Website.
• Provides Submitters WSDOT SFTP Username and Passwords
• Create WSDOT SFPT Folder
• Receives SOQs
• Completes SOQ Pass/Fail Review Checklist
• Moves SOQs to the ECM
• Receives Proposals
• Review proposals upset value determination
• Completes Proposal Pass/Fail Review Checklists
• Receives the Apparent Best Value Determination Spreadsheet from the Facilitator
• Conducts the public opening of the Price Proposals and inputs pricing into the Apparent Best Value Determination Spreadsheet.
• Receives evaluation summary spreadsheets from the Facilitator
• Provides evaluation materials to the Submitters and Proposers at the appropriate time
• Receives the Apparent Best Value Determination Spreadsheet from the Facilitator
6-3
Statement of Qualifications Evaluations Process 6-3.1
Objectives The objective of the SOQ evaluation process is to conduct a transparent and defensible selection process by evaluating SOQs fairly. The Evaluation Team must maintain confidentiality not only of the documents but the process as well. The end result is to produce a short list of qualified Submitters that WSDOT will then invite to propose on the project.
6-3.2
Overall Statement of Qualifications Evaluation Process The SOQ is a response to the RFQ. It is at this time that Submitters describes how their experience on past projects of similar scope and complexity meet the project goals. Illustrated in the flow chart below (Exhibit 6-1) is the SOQ evaluation process.
Page 6-10
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Chapter 6
Exhibit 6-1
SOQ Evaluation Flow Chart
Exhibit 6-1 SOQ Evaluation Flow Chart
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-11
Chapter 6
6-3.3
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Statement of Qualifications Evaluation Chart When evaluating SOQ, it is important to have an understanding of how the various teams’ Key Personnel and Major Participants will work together. If they have worked together in the past, the Submitter’s team can demonstrate this through examples of past experience. In the chart below (Exhibit 6-2), you will see that the work of CAA forms the basis for all subsequent evaluation work. Chapter 6
Exhibit SOQ Evaluation Chart Exhibit 6-26-2 SOQ Evaluation Chart
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
6-3.5 Process 6-3.6 Adjectival Rating Criteria Using the Adjectival Evaluation and Scoring Guide (as provided in Table 7.1 of the RFQ, the evaluators determine an adjectival rating based on the requirements of the RFQ, and choose a percentage from within range associated with the adjectival rating. That percentage of the percent of maximum score will determine the final score for that section.
6-3.7 Assessing Strengths and Weaknesses In reviewing each SOQ, the evaluators determine the strengths and weaknesses for each of the evaluation criteria, recording their findings on the Qualitative Evaluation Form for each Key Personnel and Major Participant. Strengths and weaknesses do not have to be exclusively indicated within the section being evaluated to influence the evaluation scoring. For example, if a statement that is submitted in one section influences the score in another section, the Evaluator may take that statement into account. Page 6-12
Page 6-2
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 Design-Build Manual, M 3126.03  
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
6-3.4
Chapter 6
Schedule The SOQ evaluation process generally takes 2 to 3 weeks depending on how many submittals are received.
6-3.5
SOQ Evaluation Process Described below are the procedures for developing the short list of Submitters:
• The Facilitator completes the project-specific SOQ Pass/Fail Review Checklist Template and submits it to CAA.
• The WSDOT CAA Office receives the SOQs and reviews each for Pass/Fail criteria and completes the SOQ Pass/Fail Review Checklist provided by the Project Team.
• CAA saves responsive SOQs in Book 11, Evaluations in ECM.
• The Facilitator makes a copy of each SOQ and saves it in a secure restricted access location.
• The Facilitator will briefly review each SOQ and make a list that includes the name of Key Personnel and Major Participants firm mentioned in each SOQ. This list will be provided to the Evaluation Team to aid them in identifying any possible conflicts of interest. A report for concurrence is sent to the ASCE.
• Each Evaluation Team member will receive the conformed RFQ at the SOQ evaluation kick-off meeting and guidance on which evaluation method to use.
• Questions pertaining to the evaluation criteria or the evaluation process will be addressed at the SOQ evaluation kickoff meeting. The discussion will include any subjective or other terms that require a common interpretation.
• Depending on which evaluation method the Facilitator decides, each Evaluator will either individually score the SOQs using the Qualitative Evaluation Form to identify strengths and weaknesses or will identify strengths and weaknesses and comment in the SOQ PDF. This activity takes approximately two weeks.
• The Evaluation Team will provide either their individual Qualitative Evaluation Form or their individual PDF with comments to the Facilitator to combine. This activity takes approximately 2 days.
• The Evaluation Team will collaborate during in the room evaluations with the Facilitator to finalize scoring of all the strengths and weakness identified by the individual evaluations for each SOQ. This activity takes approximately two weeks.
• The official evaluation summary will be recorded in the Qualitative Evaluation Form regardless of the evaluation method used.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-13
Chapter 6
6-3.6
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Adjectival Rating Criteria The adjectival rating criteria will be used when evaluating the SOQs. Each Evaluator will review the SOQs independently, determine strengths and weaknesses for each scored element of the SOQ, and record their findings on the Qualitative Evaluation Form. Strengths and weaknesses related to a particular criteria element may be evaluated from any component of the SOQ. Documentation in the Qualitative Evaluation Forms should be comprehensive and adequately provide the basis of the assessment, including the strengths and weaknesses supporting the assigned ratings. After completing and submitting the individual forms to the Facilitator, the Facilitator working with the Evaluators, will combine the comments into one Qualitative Evaluation Form, grouping similar comments together. The Facilitator will temporarily use colors or shading to differentiate each evaluator to help facilitate the consolidation efforts that will occur in the next step. (Note that these colors/shading are temporary and will be removed prior to finalizing the Qualitative Evaluation Form.) Using the Adjectival Evaluation and Scoring Guide (as provided in Table 7-1 of the RFQ), the Evaluators determine an adjectival rating based on the requirements of the RFQ, and select the percentage from within the range associated with the adjectival rating that best reflects the strength/weakness of the element. That percentage of the maximum score will determine the final score for that section.
6-3.7
Assessing Strengths and Weaknesses In reviewing each SOQ, the Evaluators determine the strengths and weaknesses for each of the evaluation criteria, recording their findings on the Qualitative Evaluation Form for each Key Personnel and Major Participant. Strengths and weaknesses do not have to be exclusively indicated within the section being evaluated to influence the evaluation scoring. For example, if a statement that is submitted in one section influences the score in another section, the Evaluator may take that statement into account. The Evaluators may further distinguish the strengths and weaknesses as “significant” or “minor.” The Evaluators may also use a “high” or “low” prefix to further differentiate the strengths or weaknesses. When, in the judgment of the Evaluators, an SOQ element does not equate to a strength or weakness, but is being acknowledged, a “Neutral” will be identified. The definitions of Strength and Weakness are found in Chapter 1 and are further expanded in Exhibit 6-3.
Page 6-14
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Exhibit 6-3
Chapter 6
Strengths and Weaknesses Assessment Table
1. High Significant Strength 2. Significant Strength 3. Low Significant Strength 4. High Minor Strength 5. Minor Strength
Strength – That part of the proposal which represents a benefit to the project and is expected to increase the Proposer’s ability to meet or exceed the project goals.
6. Low Minor Strength
A significant strength has a considerable positive influence on the Submitter’s ability to meet or exceed the project goals. A minor strength has a slight positive influence on the Submitter’s ability to meet or exceed the project goals.
7. Neutral 8. Low Minor Weakness 9. Minor Weakness 10. High Minor Weakness 11. Low Significant Weakness 12. Significant Weakness 13. High Significant Weakness
6-3.8
A minor weakness has a slight negative influence on the Weakness – That part of Submitter’s ability to meet the the proposal which detracts project goals. from the Proposer’s ability to meet the project goals or A significant weakness has a may result in an inefficient considerable negative influence of ineffective performance. on the Submitter’s ability to meet the project goals.
Conclusion of SOQ Evaluation Procedure After conferring with the Project Management Team, the Project Team will debrief the Region Executive, and HQ Executive Teams to obtain their concurrence that the Evaluation Team following the SOQ evaluation process. The Facilitator will prepare the notices with the results of the evaluation process using the Qualitative Evaluation Form for CAA to release to all Submitters. An invitation to respond to the RFP will be extended to the short listed Submitters only. At the conclusion of the evaluation process, it is the responsibility of the Facilitator to prepare the Project SOQ Evaluation Summary. The Project SOQ Evaluation Summary includes all evaluator affidavits, all final comments as noted on the Qualitative Evaluation Forms, all final scoring sheets, and the final Executive Summary in a single PDF file. Upon completion of the Project SOQ Evaluation Summary, the Facilitator retains one copy for the project file and forwards one to CAA. This is the official evaluation record and should be stored in the ECM. For SOQ evaluations, the Evaluation Team will recommend a logical breaking point to identify the most highly qualified Submitters and develop a recommended short list. If there are more than three SOQs, the Evaluation Team should recommend a short list of at least three of the most highly qualified Submitters.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-15
Chapter 6
6-3.9
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
SOQ Evaluation Materials Each Submitter will be provided their detailed scores and Evaluators’ comments, along with the anonymous total scores of all Submitters, as attachments to their Short List letter. The project team must submit this evaluation information to CAA the day before the Short List announcement is scheduled at the latest. The Facilitator will email CAA the Qualitative Evaluation Form and the following information for each Submitter:
• Detailed scores
• Evaluators’ comments
• Total scores for all the Submitters without Evaluators names The Facilitator is responsible for ensuring the Evaluators’ comments are error free, written in a factual manner devoid of opinion, and identify the correct Submitter. CAA will do a cursory review prior to emailing each Submitter their evaluation information.
6-4
Proposal Evaluations 6-4.1
Objectives The objective of the proposal evaluation process is to conduct a transparent and defensible selection process by evaluating proposals fairly and according to the criteria established in the RFP documents (ITP, General Provisions, Technical Requirements, and Appendices). Confidentiality is vital throughout the evaluation proceedings. The ultimate objective of the proposal evaluation is to create value for the project. An Apparent Best Value selection process concludes and a better project is achieved as Proposers provide innovation and Betterments in an effort to gain more technical credits and be the successful Proposer.
6-4.2
Overall Proposal Evaluation Process The Proposal is a response to the RFP. It is at this time that Proposers describe the overall approach their firm will take to design and construct the project. Illustrated in the flow chart below (Exhibit 6-4) is the proposal evaluation process.
Page 6-16
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Chapter 6
Evaluation of Statements ofProcess Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals Exhibit 6-4 Proposal Evaluation
Chapter 6
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-17
Chapter 6
6-4.3
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Proposal Evaluation Chart Chapter 6
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Proposal Evaluation Chart When 6-4.3 evaluating a Proposal, it is important to have an understanding of how the various When evaluating a Proposal, it is important to have an understanding of how the various teams teams of people work together as depicted in the organizational chart below (Exhibit 6-5). of people work together. In the organizational chart below (Exhibit 6-5), the Technical Advisors are added to the Team.
A confidential chart should be provided to the Proposal Evaluators that identifies the confidential chart should be provided to the proposal evaluators that identifies the names of names of the Athe individuals performing the functions in Exhibit 6-5. individuals performing the functions in Exhibit 6-5. Exhibit 6-5
6-4.4
Exhibit 6-5 Evaluation Chart Proposal Evaluation Chart Proposal
6-4.4 Schedule
Schedule
The proposal evaluation process is 3 to 4 weeks. This schedule could be a longer time period depending on project complexities.
The proposal evaluation process is 3 to 4 weeks. This schedule could be longer, The proposal evaluation debriefs take approximately two weeks to finalize the results with depending onthe project complexities. following teams: HQ Management, Regional Management, Executive Management, and Project Management.
The proposal evaluation debriefs take approximately two weeks to present to the 6-4.5 Proposal Evaluation Process following teams: HQ Management, Regional Management, Executive Management, The Evaluation Team will evaluate the Proposals as outlined in Section 6-3.6 using adjectival and Project Management. rating criteria.
Page 6-6
Page 6-18
Design-Build Manual, M 3126.03 
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
6-4.5
Chapter 6
Proposal Evaluation Process The Evaluation Team will evaluate the Proposals as outlined in Section called Adjectival Rating Criteria.
• The Facilitator conforms the RFP to include all addenda for convenience
• The Facilitator prepares the project-specific Proposal Pass/Fail Review Checklist
• The Facilitator develops the Proposal Evaluation Kick-Off Meeting Agenda
• The Facilitator develops the Evaluation Team Organizational Chart
• The Facilitator develops evaluation schedule
• The Facilitator schedules the Evaluators’ Proposal evaluation kick-off meeting
• The Facilitator schedules the in-the-room evaluation meetings (via virtual media platform)
• The Facilitator schedules the Technical Advisor report-out meetings
• The Facilitator schedules all proposal internal debrief meetings.
• The Facilitator arranges with the CAA Office to obtain the Technical Proposals. The Price Proposal remain secure in BidX.
• The Facilitator reviews each of the proposals and verifies the participants list
• The Facilitator ensure that all Major Participants and Key Personnel referenced match that of the SOQ.
• If applicable, CAA opens Form C, Upset Amount to verify if one Proposer is under Upset Amount.
• CAA completed Proposal Pass/Fail Review
• CAA Saves Proposals in the ECM
• CAA meets with Facilitator to ensure access to ECM Book 11.
• The Evaluation Team has Proposal Evaluation Kick-Off Meeting.
• The Evaluation Team follows the Evaluation Method approved by the Facilitator.
• Evaluators due their Independent Evaluations.
• Technical Advisor and OEO Technical Advisor review their requested sections and provide materials back to Facilitator.
• The Facilitator combines all S/W and comments.
• The Evaluation Team does In-The-Room Evaluations.
• The Facilitator provides CAA final Qualitative Evaluation Forms.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-19
Chapter 6
6-4.6
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Proposal Evaluation Kick-Off Meeting This meeting is used to kick-off the evaluation process. It is where the Project Goals are reviewed. The Facilitator gathers all of the evaluation kick-off meeting materials, including:
• Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreements
• No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavits
• List of participants
• Conformed ITP, Chapter 2, (Technical Requirements), Chapter 1 (GP)
• Responses to formal questions
• Example completed evaluation form to show level of detail
• Evaluation schedule
• Proposals
• The Facilitator, Evaluators, Technical Advisors, OEO Technical Advisor (if appliable), and Observers attend the evaluation kick-off meeting, where the Facilitator provides secure access to the evaluation materials.
• The Facilitator ensures that any new members of the Evaluation Team sign a Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement and a No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavit. Previous SOQ Evaluation team members should have already completed the Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure Agreement and a No-Conflicts of Interest Affidavit. If an additional Major Participant or Key Personnel is identified, all Evaluators should ensure there are no conflicts of interest.
• The Facilitator describes the evaluation process
• If the comment in the Proposal PDF method is used, the Facilitator verifies Evaluation Team has the required software.
6-4.7
Independent Evaluations
• The Evaluators individually read the proposals, document their findings either in the comment in the PDF method or on their individual Qualitative Evaluation Forms, and assign strengths and weaknesses to each.
• The Evaluators submit their individual PDF with comments or Qualitative Evaluation Forms to the Facilitator.
Page 6-20
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
6-4.8
Chapter 6
In-the-Room Evaluations Prior to the in the room evaluation, the Facilitator combines the assessments from each evaluator and OEO Technical Advisor (on Federal projects) into one PDF with comments or on one Qualitative Evaluation Form .
• The Evaluation Team meets to discuss each of the evaluators’ perspectives and to combine their similar comments into a single comment. The Evaluators then agree on a final strength and weakness for each comment.
• Technical Advisors will review the Technical Proposal in their respective discipline areas, and will present their findings to the Evaluators during a scheduled session. The Evaluators can ask questions of the Technical Advisors but only in an ‘open forum’ where all the Evaluators are present. Evaluators may consider the Technical Advisor’s input when determining a score for that particular section.
• The Facilitator and Evaluators develop the finalized Qualitative Evaluation Form (even if the comment in the PDF method is used a finalized Qualitative Evaluation Form must be created)
• After considering the Technical Advisor’s input, the Evaluators will consolidate their comments and develop a single agreed to Qualitative Evaluation Form for each criteria element.
• The Evaluation Team may perform reference checks for each Proposer. Reference checks are typically performed by the Facilitator (or the PE) in the presence of the rest of the Evaluation Team. The Evaluation Team will supplement existing findings with information obtained during the reference checks and may revise strength/ weakness ratings accordingly.
• Evaluators determine an adjectival rating based on the requirements of the ITP and select the percentage from within the range associated with the adjectival rating that best reflects the strength/weakness of the element. That percentage of the maximum score will determine the final score for that section.
• The Facilitator finalizes the Qualitative Evaluation Form for the evaluators to perform a side-by-side consistency check for each proposal. This is intended to check that there was consistency in how the strengths, weaknesses, and adjectival ratings were assigned. THE PROPOSALS ARE NOT EVALUATED IN RELATION TO ONE ANOTHER, BUT AGAINST THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE RFP.
• The Facilitator reveals the Overall Summary Form, which is part of the Qualitative Evaluation Form, to the Evaluation Team to review the final scores for each proposal.
• The Facilitator prepares the Apparent Best Value spreadsheet, inserting the final overall technical score for each Proposer, and all other project-specific information, except for the Price Proposals (which have not been opened yet) and submits the Apparent Best Value spreadsheet to the CAA Office.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Page 6-21
Chapter 6
6-4.9
Evaluation of Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposals
Internal Proposal Debriefs In accordance with Chapter 5 General Procurement Activities.
6-4.10
Identification of Betterments A Betterment is identified as any component or system, which exceeds the minimum requirements stated in the RFP. Betterments are included in the proposals and are intended to make the proposal more competitive and are often tied to areas of importance specified by WSDOT in the RFP documents. Betterments may provide additional features and functions such as the capacity, capability, level of service, efficiency, duration and performance of the project, which is superior to WSDOT’s RFP requirements. It is important to recognize that a Betterment should be an improvement, not merely a change, to the contract and must be related to the project goals. The Betterments list is initially determined during the evaluation of the Proposal and concurred to by the Project Engineer. The list is discussed and agreed upon with the Proposer. The list is then given to the Facilitator who forwards it to CAA to become a part of the successful Proposer’s contract.
6-4.11
Award Process The CAA Office receives the Apparent Best Value spreadsheet, prepopulated with the technical credits awarded, and the Apparent Best Value Proposal Score formula, which is shown in the ITP. The CAA Office conducts the public opening of the Price Proposals. As each proposal price is entered into the spreadsheet, the technical credit is applied to the proposal price giving the Apparent Best Value Score. The proposal deemed responsive, under the Upset Price (if any), and with the lowest Apparent Best Value Score is announced as the Apparent Best Value Proposal. The technical credits do not actually reduce the contract amount; they are only used to obtain the Apparent Best Value Score.
6-4.12
Proposal Evaluation Materials The Facilitator must email the evaluation information listed below to CAA within 24 hours after announcement of the Apparent Best Value Proposer:
• Detailed scores for each proposer
• Evaluators’ comments for each proposer The Facilitator is responsible for ensuring the Evaluators’ comments are error free and identify the correct Proposer. CAA will do a cursory review prior to emailing each Proposer their evaluation information.
Page 6-22
Design-Build Manual M 3126.08 
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/I