mplementation
After the Design-Builder is selected in the procurement phase and a contract is executed, the project enters into the implementation phase. The term implementation phase is used instead of construction phase because this phase includes both design and construction elements of the project. These two elements of work are typically performed in overlapping schedules, resulting in project management processes that are unique to design-build delivery.
7-1
Project Organization: Key Personnel As the project transitions from procurement to implementation, the organization will transition from a WSDOT team to a joint WSDOT/Design-Builder team. Each Request for Qualifications (RFQ) will list the required Design-Builder personnel for a project. These Key Personnel are typically:
• Project Manager The Design-Builder’s Project Manager (PM) will be responsible for the overall design, construction, schedule, budget, quality management, and contract administration for the project. It is the PM’s responsibility to ensure that the project is managed and delivered in accordance with the contract requirements and to be available to assist in issue resolution. The PM will be assigned to the project full-time from Notice to Proceed (NTP) to Physical Completion. The PM can also be the Design Manager or the Construction Manager, but cannot be both. While these positions are unlikely to be combined on large projects, smaller projects might benefit from combining these positions.
• Design Manager The Design-Builder’s Design Manager (DM) will be responsible for ensuring that the overall project design is completed, design criteria are met, and the design is managed and delivered to meet or exceed the project goals. The DM is assigned to the project full-time, from NTP through completion of the design effort, and will be available, as needed, during construction activities.
• Construction Manager The Design-Builder’s Construction Manager (CM) will be responsible for all project construction. It is the CM’s responsibility to ensure that the construction is managed and delivered in accordance with the contract requirements and to ensure that the work meets or exceeds the project goals. The CM makes sure that construction is consistent with the project design. If changes to the design are needed during construction, the CM reevaluates the design to ensure that the as-constructed product will remain consistent with the contract requirements. The CM will have experience with managing a diverse group of subcontractors and coordinating with project stakeholders to comply with Local Agency and environmental issues and requirements. The CM will be available for design package reviews and project meetings during construction. The CM is assigned to the project full-time during construction activities.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-1
Chapter 7
7-1.1
Contract Administration/Implementation
Other Project Personnel Some projects, depending on scope, risk, and complexity, may benefit from requiring additional Key Personnel such as:
• Construction Quality Assurance Manager (CQAM)
• Design Quality Assurance Manager (DQAM)
• Document Control Manager (DCM)
• Drainage Design Lead Engineer
• Environmental Compliance Manager
• Geotechnical Group Manager
• Materials Approval Engineer
• Project Quality Manager (PQM)
• Quality Testing Supervisor (QTS)
• Structural Lead Engineer
• Water Resources Engineer
7-2
Project Startup 7-2.1
Award, Contract Execution, and Notice to Proceed In the final steps of the procurement phase, the proposals are reviewed and the Apparent Best Value Proposer is announced. Contract award will typically occur within 60 calendar days of the Proposal Due Date. After the contract is awarded, the successful Proposer has 20 calendar days to submit all required documents for execution of the contract. The documents include the signed contract, insurance certification, contract bond, and other pre-award information required by the contract, as well as registration as a contractor in the State of Washington. Within 7 calendar days of contract execution, and prior to issuing NTP, the WSDOT Engineer and the Design-Builder shall discuss the merits of a Practical Design Workshop. Refer to Request for Proposal (RFP) Section 1-04.3 for further information on Practical Design Workshops. NTP is written authorization issued by WSDOT that permits the Design-Builder to commence performance of the work. NTP is issued shortly after contract execution, but WSDOT may defer issuance of NTP for up to 30 calendar days after contract execution. NTP marks the start of contract days. For certain projects, such as those where the NEPA analysis has not been completed prior to contract execution or where phased authorization is required due to Governmental Body imposed restrictions, multiple NTPs (e.g. NTP1, NTP2, etc.) may be utilized.
Page 7-2
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
Chapter 7
Refer to the following flowcharts to review the steps taken after the Apparent Best Value Proposer is announced:
• ABV to Award Flow Chart
• Award to NTP Flow Chart
7-2.2
Co-Location Co-location can greatly facilitate collaboration between WSDOT and the Design-Builder. The size, location, and complexity of a project should be considered when determining the level of co-location needed. It might not be practical for smaller, simpler projects to provide co-location. Generally, the Design-Builder will provide and maintain all building space, including office space for WSDOT, facilities, equipment, and vehicles necessary to construct the project and to meet the requirements of the RFP. Sufficient space will be provided in the Design-Builder’s project office for simultaneous occupancy by both construction and design personnel. Specific office requirements are specified in the RFP. At project startup, the Design-Builder is encouraged to co-locate its staff with WSDOT into a single project office, with the Design-Builder and WSDOT staff integrated by discipline. The Design-Builder will coordinate with WSDOT prior to securing data or phone connections for a co-located office. Refer to RFP Section 2.1 for further information on co-location.
7-3
Contract Meetings, Hold Points, and Milestones 7-3.1
Contract Meetings
7-3.1.1
All Meetings
The Design-Builder is responsible for providing meeting facilities and the development and distribution of meeting agendas and minutes. Refer to RFP Section 2.1 for further information.
7-3.1.2
Orientation Meeting
Within 14 calendar days of NTP, the Design-Builder will schedule an orientation meeting between the Design-Builder and WSDOT Engineer to address documentation requirements. Refer to RFP Section 2.1 for further information.
7-3.1.3
Kick-Off Meeting
As soon as possible, but not more than 30 calendar days after NTP, the Design-Builder will schedule a kick-off meeting with WSDOT Engineer to discuss the project, exchange information as described in the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01, and cover topics relevant to design phase of the contract. The orientation and kick-off meetings may be combined if the Design-Builder and WSDOT Engineer agree. Refer to RFP Section 2.1 for further information.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-3
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-3.1.4
Pre-Fabrication Meeting
A pre-fabrication meeting will be held prior to the fabrication of major items requiring WSDOT inspection and approval. The Design-Builder will be responsible for scheduling the pre-fabrication meeting, which is to be held at the facility where the fabrication will take place. The Design-Builder will arrange for WSDOT Fabrication Office inspection of all fabricated materials for the project. Refer to RFP Section 2.25 for further information.
7-3.1.5
Task Force Meetings
Task force meetings encourage close communication between WSDOT and the DesignBuilder throughout the design and construction of the project. It is anticipated that this close communication will expedite project reviews and facilitate the incorporation of innovative project solutions. These meetings, combined with over-the-shoulder reviews, shall be an integral part of the process to discuss and resolve design issues outside of the formal review process. Task force meetings are required for specific disciplines as noted in the Technical Requirements of the contract. Some examples are Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) program, environmental, close out, and design task force meetings. Refer to RFP Section 2.1 for further information.
7-3.1.6
Quality Assurance Task Force Meetings
The WSDOT Engineer and Design-Builder will form a Quality Assurance (QA) Task Force that will provide the initial forum for quality issue resolution in the design-build process. The QA Task Force’s responsibility is to remedy all non-conforming work in the field identified by Non-Conformance Reports (NCRs) or Non-Conformance Issues (NCIs). They will also be required to address issues that either directly or indirectly affect project quality. Once the Design-Builder has formed a QA Team with individuals responsible for QA activities, the QA Task Force shall begin weekly meetings. WSDOT will form its own quality team and will participate in these meetings. These meetings will discuss, address, and correct quality related issues. Potential quality issues include but are not limited to the following: design, inspection, substandard material, deficient QA and Quality Control (QC) processes, test results that are out of tolerance, variations between QA and Quality Verification (QV) test data (F&t analysis), future quality concerns, as well as other issues that the Design-Builder or WSDOT may have regarding quality of the project. Meeting frequency may decrease if quality issues decrease. If, however, contract performance becomes substandard, the Design-Builder could be required to increase the frequency of the meetings until project quality issues improve. Either the PQM, DQAM, or CQAM will schedule meetings, develop agendas, document the meeting minutes, and distribute minutes to attendees. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information.
Page 7-4
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-3.1.7
Chapter 7
Close Out Task Force Meetings
Close Out Task Force meetings will include the PQM, DCM, PM, DM, and the WSDOT Engineer at a minimum. It is important that close out efforts commence immediately after NTP and proactively continue throughout the duration of the project. Therefore, Close Out Task Force meetings will be held monthly starting after NTP, earlier if proposed by the Design-Builder, and continuing through Substantial Completion. After Substantial Completion is given, meetings occur weekly from Substantial Completion through Completion. Refer to RFP Section 2.12 for further information.
7-3.1.8
Pre-Activity Meetings
The Design-Builder will hold pre-activity meetings to ensure that all project personnel have a thorough understanding of the work to be accomplished prior to beginning construction on a work activity. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information.
7-3.2
Milestones and Hold Points
7-3.2.1
Milestones
Form D, of the Instructions to Proposers, is the Design-Builder’s proposal on contract time commitments for completion of the listed milestones. Upon contract execution, the contract time/milestone completion deadlines shown on Form D become contractual requirements. All schedules by the Design-Builder shall include contract milestones that include those listed on Form D of the Design-Builder’s proposal and completion milestones (Completion Date and Final Acceptance Date). Refer to RFP Section 1-08.3(2).
7-3.2.2
Hold Points
RFP Section 2.28 defines the deliverable requirements for Hold Points. The Hold Point procedure is used to enhance the level of control at specific construction milestones. WSDOT requires construction QA personnel to use Hold Points to ensure that an individual phase of construction is complete and in accordance with the contract before moving on to the next phase of work. The Design-Builder’s QC or production group is responsible for resolving outstanding NCRs and NCIs. Construction QA personnel also use Hold Points to restrain, remediate, and refocus QC/production when the DesignBuilder has not completed QC/production work before moving on to the next stage of work (working at risk). Hold Point refers to pausing construction activities until a QA inspection is accepted. Construction QA inspection Hold Points are particularly important when work cannot be inspected later because a problem or non-conformance could be covered up. Hold Points are also defined for critical inspections when cost of re-work would be high if problems are identified later. Pre-activity meetings are Hold Points.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-5
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-3.2.3
Hold Point Inspection
1. Hold points shall be identified in the construction process where critical characteristics are to be measured and maintained and at points where it is impractical to determine the adequacy of either materials or workmanship once work proceeds past these points. 2. Pre-activity meetings shall be included in the Design-Builder’s Quality Management Plan (QMP) as Hold Points. 3. Hold Points shall be established where required QA inspection is mandatory. 4. The Design-Builder shall provide 3 calendar days’ notice to WSDOT prior to each Hold Point so that WSDOT, at its discretion, can observe or visually examine a specific work operation or test. 5. Work shall not proceed until inspection is completed and a written release is granted by the Design-Builder’s QA organization. 6. The Engineer of Record (EOR) and the Designer of Record shall submit specific Hold Points with the Released for Construction (RFC) Documents. 7. The CQAM shall establish Hold Points per RFP Section 2.28. The QMP shall identify all additional Hold Points necessary to certify compliance. a. The Hold Points listed in the RFP provide the Design-Builder’s QA organization notice of the minimum expected or owner-predicted hold points that are required. As mentioned in item 6, the EOR shall expand this list to reflect the RFC plans and specifications. Hold Points should be listed on all inspection and test plans so that QV/QA/QC personnel will all know when Hold Points are to be in effect. A hold status indicator should also be used to indicate when the inspection is passed. The code inspection green tag is a wellknown example of a hold status indicator. Appropriately used, Hold Points are an effective tool to monitor production and ensure quality. Hold Points allow all obligated stakeholders the opportunity to review plan and specification compliance. The Design-Builder’s QA organization is obligated to identify all quality incidents, non-conformances, and field design changes. In the case of pre-activity meetings, work plans can be discussed, augmented, adjusted, or curtailed, dependent on specific needs that may have not been initially apparent.
Page 7-6
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-4
Chapter 7
Contract Submittals 7-4.1
Document Control Work Plan The Design-Builder will submit a document control work plan within 30 calendar days of NTP or prior to the first design submittal, whichever occurs first. Reference RFP Section 2.1 for further information.
7-4.2
Quality Management Plan The QMP is one of several submittals that are required to be approved in writing by the WSDOT Engineer (a complete list of WSDOT approvals can be found here). The QMP shall be consistent with the Design-Builder’s proposal. A draft QMP is to be submitted to the WSDOT Engineer for review within 30 calendar days of NTP. The WSDOT Engineer will not accept RFC design submittals until the Design-Builder’s final QMP for design has been approved in writing by the WSDOT Engineer. No construction work activities that require QA/QC inspection or testing will commence until the DesignBuilder’s final QMP for construction has been approved in writing by the WSDOT Engineer. The QMP will remain in effect until all requirements of the contract have been fulfilled and the project is accepted. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information on all the different technical discipline submittals the QMP addresses.
7-4.3
Environmental Compliance Plan The Design-Builder will submit an environmental compliance plan in accordance with RFP Section 2.8.
7-4.4
Design Documentation The Design-Builder is required to submit a draft Project Development Approval (PDA) within 60 calendar days of the last RFC design submittal. The WSDOT Engineer will Review and Comment within 25 calendar days. All comments have to be resolved before the PDA is finalized and submitted to the WSDOT Engineer for approval. Prior to Physical Completion or termination of the contract, the Design-Builder will collect and submit all design documents prepared in the performance of the contract. The final design documents will include, at a minimum, the following:
• Design Documentation Package, Project File, and technical memoranda
• PDA
• Updated electronic MicroStation and InRoads files in accordance with the WSDOT Electronic Engineering Data Standards, including all RFC sheets, reference files, and base mapping (topography, including survey updates). Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information on preliminary design submittals. Refer to RFP Section 2.12 for further information on final design submittals.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-7
Chapter 7
7-4.5
Contract Administration/Implementation
Released for Construction Documents RFC documents are the primary documents that define the construction of the project. To leverage the design-build advantages of a parallel and overlapping design and construction, RFC documents are usually issued in multiple packages to allow for the early start of construction before the design for the project as a whole is completed. However, what is to be constructed must have supporting designs that are complete and final. WSDOT generally reserves acceptance authority over revisions to RFC documents. Acceptance can be withheld if partial or incomplete designs are included in the revised documents. This puts the risk of continuity and compatibility of subsequent RFC documents on the Design-Builder. Throughout the course of the project, the DesignBuilder will maintain in the Design-Builder’s project office and make available for WSDOT review RFC documents and revised RFC documents. The QA and QC procedures in the QMP will identify procedures for RFC.
7-4.6
Non-Conformance Report and Non-Conformance Issue The Design-Builder’s QA organization assesses the performance of the Design-Builder’s QC organization and identifies and documents all elements of work that have not, or are believed to have not, been performed in accordance with approved drawings, specifications, and other contract documents. This documentation along with the reason for non-conformance will be captured in an NCR. The NCR will be submitted to the WSDOT Engineer in writing within 24 hours of identification and a copy will be sent to the DM. For every instance of non-conforming work that is cited by the Design-Builder or by the WSDOT Engineer, the Design-Builder will perform remediation to bring the work into conformance with the contract. If the WSDOT Engineer does not agree with the remedial actions set forth in the NCR, the WSDOT Engineer has the authority to call for removal of the non-conforming work, or to stop work within that area until the corrective action plan has been approved by the WSDOT Engineer. The CQAM will maintain a log of all NCRs and corrective action plans and present them at QA Task Force meetings. If, in the design/construction process, WSDOT identifies elements that do not conform with contract requirements, WSDOT should document its own NCIs based on its observance of the work.
Page 7-8
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-4.7
Chapter 7
As Builts Prior to Physical Completion of the project, the Design-Builder is required to update and re-release all RFC and Design Documents affected by significant revisions made during construction. All revisions to RFC documents will be performed by, or under the direct supervision of, the EOR. For significant revisions, each re-issued sheet of the revised RFC plans and the cover of each of the re-issued revised RFC Technical Specifications will include the Licensed Professional Engineer’s stamp and signature. The Design-Builder shall outline the threshold for these changes in their QMP. MicroStation and InRoads files will be updated with all significant revisions to show the as-constructed conditions, incorporating all revisions made during construction. The As Built plans will reflect the same degree of detail as the RFC documents. As Built plans shall be submitted as a complete package in sequence, including all RFC sheets, both those with significant revisions and those without, in accordance with the numbering and naming conventions as defined in the WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31 and WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. There may additional As Built requirements if compensatory wetland or stream mitigation is required for the project. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Washington State Department of Ecology typically require an As Built report with photos and other information (the projectspecific environmental commitments list should include any environmental specific As Built requirements. The WSDOT Engineer will Review and Comment on the submittal and advise the Design-Builder of acceptance or provide comments to be resolved. Comments will be addressed as outlined in the Design-Builder’s QMP. Once comments are addressed, the final As Built submittal is sent to the WSDOT Engineer. The WSDOT Engineer’s approval is required prior to Completion. Refer to RFP Section 2.12 for further information on the As Built submittal.
7-4.8
Final Records The Design-Builder will submit final temporary and permanent final records for the project in accordance with RFP Section 2.12.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-9
Chapter 7
7-5
Contract Administration/Implementation
Partnering WSDOT encourages partnering among WSDOT, the Design-Builder, and its subcontractors. The partnering process is intended to draw on the strengths of each organization to help identify and achieve reciprocal goals, including achieving Completion of the work on time, within budget, and in accordance with its intended purpose. A primary consideration of partnering is the prompt and equitable resolution of issues affecting the conduct of the work under the contract and the rights and responsibilities of the respective parties. Partnering is an integral part of the QMP. A partnering agreement will be included in the QMP for handling disputes related to quality. Refer to RFP Section 1.09.10 for further information on partnering schedules, cost, scheduling, and workshops. Also, refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information on partnering.
7-6
Design Development WSDOT’s intention is to allow the Design-Builder flexibility in design and construction by accommodating the processes, procedures, and innovative techniques that are preferred by the Design-Builder, as long as they are consistent with the Basic Configuration, site conditions, accepted engineering practices, environmental commitments, and the standards, guidelines, and procedures identified in the contract.
7-6.1
Process After award, the design responsibility of the project is transferred to the Design-Builder. The owner remains involved in the design process through joint task force meetings, during formal reviews of milestone design submittals, and as the design is further refined during the construction of the project. The intent of design submittals is to provide a formal opportunity for WSDOT, the Design-Builder, various design team disciplines, and other approved project stakeholders to review the construction documents in order to ensure that:
• The design is progressing appropriately and proceeding in accordance with contract requirements
• The plans reflect the Design-Builder’s requirements for construction
• The design features are coordinated
• That there are no fatal flaws within a given discipline or between disciplines
• The necessary WSDOT Engineer approvals are received (i.e. Design Analysis, maximum extent feasible, etc.) prior to incorporation into the project
Page 7-10
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
Chapter 7
The minimum contents of design submittals for each discipline shall be:
• As specified in each discipline’s respective RFP section
• As specified in RFP Section 2.28
• As mutually agreed by members of the applicable task force (or by agreement between the WSDOT Engineer and the Design-Builder if no specific task force applies.)
7-6.2
Design Quality Assurance and Quality Control The QA and QC procedures for each type of Design Document and RFC document are organized by engineering discipline in the QMP. Refer to RFP Section 2.12 and Section 2.28 for further information on design submittals (preliminary, final, and RFC), QA and QC responsibilities, and Design Documentation.
7-7
Construction Processes Unless exclusively stated in the RFP documents any reference of the Project Engineer (PE) in the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 shall mean the WSDOT Engineer.
7-7.1
Testing, Inspection, and Materials Quality Assurance It is the responsibility of the CQAM to implement quality planning, oversee the QA testing and inspection, and coordinate with WSDOTs verification testing, inspection, and Independent Assurance (IA) requirements. All duties listed in Section 9-1.4 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 are the responsibility of the CQAM. The Design-Builder will designate a Materials Approval Engineer having authority for the approval of all materials. The Materials Approval Engineer will review and approve all materials submitted through Request for Approval of Materials (RAM), Qualified Products List (QPL), and proprietary items for the project in accordance with Section 9-1.3 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. The Materials Approval Engineer reports directly to the DM. The Materials Approval Engineer could also be the PQM or the DQAM, but cannot have responsibility for construction production. The Design-Builder will provide a QTS who may be an employee of the Design-Builder’s QA testing laboratory or of the independent testing laboratory hired to perform the QA testing. The QTS or their representative will be at the site where the testing is being performed. The QTS schedules, reviews, and verifies for compliance all test reports performed by the QA testing laboratory. The QTS report to the CQAM. The QTS cannot have responsibility for construction production or be the CQAM. QA Testing Technicians performing the field and laboratory QA sampling and testing will be employed by the Design-Builder or an agent’s laboratory. QA Testing Technicians will not be affiliated with or employed by materials suppliers, subsidiaries, or the QC organization. QA Testing Technicians will not perform QC testing and they will report to the CQAM or the QTS.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-11
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/Implementation
QA Inspection Technicians will inspect, verify materials, and document all construction activities for compliance to the contract. QA Inspection Technicians will not be affiliated with or employed by materials suppliers, subsidiaries, or the QC organization. QA Inspection Technicians will not perform QC inspection. QA Inspection Technicians report to the CQAM. All QA testing that will be used for acceptance of materials will be performed by a laboratory approved by the WSDOT Engineer. The QA Laboratory Manager reports directly to the QTS. The Design-Builder or a subcontractor employs the laboratory personnel. The materials testing laboratory that is used for QA testing will not perform QC testing and will not be owned, operated, equipped, or staffed by material suppliers. The laboratory will meet the requirements of AASHTO R-18 for qualified testers and calibrated/verified equipment and be able to accomplish the testing according to the test procedure they are performing. QA Testing Technicians and construction inspectors may attend the instructional courses WSDOT provides its personnel on a space-available basis, at no cost to the Design-Builder. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information.
7-7.2
Statistical Analysis of Materials The Design-Builder is required to input all QA testing data that is categorized in RFP Section 2.25.12.6. This table replaces the frequency table in the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. Once that data is input in Statistical Analysis of Materials (SAM), there is direction in RFP Section 2.25.12.6 as to whether or not F&t Analysis is required for acceptance of the Design-Builder’s QA testing. The Design-Builder is also required to make the F&t comparisons using SAM and report during the QA Task Force meeting whether or not there are differing means or variabilities within the constituent portions of each material mix design.
7-7.3
F&t Analysis RFP Section 2.25.5.2 requires QV to validate QA test results through F&t analysis on WSDOT design-build projects. QV test results act as either the validation or the rejection vehicle for WSDOT as they are no longer self-performing acceptance or QA testing. Validation through F&t analysis helps develop a confidence level in testing results with few exceptions. As WSDOT is bound to comply with 23 CFR 637, we are also required to validate all agents performing QA on our behalf. WSDOT’s role in design-build requires F&t analysis for all processed materials being incorporated into the project. F&t analysis takes into account the variability and populations of materials being tested by both QV and QA. The “F” test deals with variability while the “t” test deals with populations or means of the test sample populations for both QV and QA.
Page 7-12
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-7.4
Chapter 7
Testers and Inspectors Quality Control The Design-Builder will be responsible for QC, which is defined as activities performed by the Design-Builder, the producer, or the manufacturer to ensure that a product is of uniform quality, meeting the contract requirements. Components of QC may include inspecting and obtaining material certifications, materials handling, construction procedures, calibration and maintenance of equipment, production process controls, and all sampling, testing, or retesting conducted for these purposes. The Design-Builder will perform, control, and ensure that operational techniques and activities provide acceptable quality and comply with the contract. The Design-Builder’s QC personnel will be a separate organization within the Design-Builder’s organization from the Design-Builder’s front line supervisors. They may be suppliers, producers, or manufacturers, but in no case may they be associated with the Design-Builder’s QA organization. The Design-Builder’s QC personnel will be trained and provided the necessary tools, testing procedures, and inspection checklists to ensure that the work product meets the contract requirements. The QC testers and inspectors report to the CM or designee but that designee cannot be the CQAM.
7-7.5
Independent Assurance The IA is an independent verification performed by WSDOT, which includes an observation of sampling and testing procedures, a review of the qualifications of the tester, and a verification of the testing equipment used to perform acceptance-testing activities. The IA will validate both the Design-Builder’s QA processes and WSDOT’s QV processes. The IA may include auditing of acceptance testing records, observing the tests being performed by the Design-Builder’s technicians, or taking split samples with the Design-Builder on a random basis for verifying the Design-Builder’s testing equipment. WSDOT will enter findings of all IA observations into the Construction Audit Tracking System (CATS). Deficiencies will result in a NCI. The Design-Builder will take corrective action immediately for all noted deficiencies.
7-7.6
Quality Assessment WSDOT will perform non-scheduled quality assessments of the Design-Builder’s work, including sampling, testing, and documentation reviews.
7-7.7
Quality Verification QV is a combination of inspections, independent sampling, and testing performed by WSDOT, or their agent, to validate that the Design-Builder is following approved QA procedures and that such procedures appear to be effective in assuring quality. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information on QV.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-13
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-8
WSDOT Auditing Processes and Non-Conforming Work It is important to recognize that workmanship is as fundamental an element of overall project quality as materials. The quality of workmanship is demonstrated through the Design-Builder’s process control procedures, QC inspections, and through WSDOT’s auditing program. WSDOT’s program to assess workmanship on design-build projects centers on compliance with the specifically stated requirements of the contract documents. For the most part, these are the project Technical Requirements and the Standard Specifications. To be effective in their role, WSDOT auditors should have an intimate familiarity with the requirements of the contract Documents and be able to cite specific requirements that are or are not in compliance.
7-8.1
WSDOT Audits The Design-Builder’s wage, payroll, subcontractors, materials, testing, equipment, working drawings, material laboratories, fabrication plants, and cost records on this contract will be open to inspection or audit by representatives of WSDOT during the life of the contract and for a period of not less than 3 years after the date of Final Acceptance. The Design-Builder will retain records identified in RFP Section 1-09.12(3) for that period. The Design-Builder is to guarantee that the wage, payroll, and cost records of all subcontractors and all lower tier subcontractors will be retained and open to similar inspection or audit for the same period. The audit may be performed by employees of WSDOT or by an auditor under contract with WSDOT. Refer to RFP Section 1-09.12 for Design-Builder required audit documents. WSDOT will periodically audit the field performance of the Design-Builder’s QA organization, testing frequencies, and acceptance testing results. The WSDOT Engineer will conduct oversight inspection audits to verify the adequacy of the Design-Builder’s inspection activities and testing procedures.
7-8.1.1
Quality Verification Audits
QV audits are WSDOT’s tool to evaluate the day-to-day, week-to-week, and monthto-month operations of a design-build project. CATS is WSDOT’s software or tool for documenting the audit findings. Inside CATS, there are Headquarters (HQ) checklists that reflect the construction requirements in Divisions 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 of each version of the Standard Specifications. Each design-build project is responsible for turning their RFP into PE checklists. Each of these types of checklists provides audit criteria that are extracted from the “shall” statements. “Shall” statements are found throughout the general requirements, Technical Requirements, Standard Specifications, appendices, proposal Betterments, management plans, and permit requirements. “Shall” statements give the Design-Builder direction and supply WSDOT auditors with audit-verifiable items. The contract-specific documents should be studied and explored for their specific shall statements. Page 7-14
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
Chapter 7
• Each “shall” statement is made into a question. You do this by first stating each “shall” statement verbatim and then asking, “Was this requirement met?”
• Each RFP chapter, appendix, or permit requirement is made into a PE checklist;
• Each checklist becomes table from which a situation-specific audit can be assembled.
• Frequency of audits: – 2 to 5 times per week for the first 6 to 9 months of a long duration project (1½ years and greater). Once the QV team is confident that QA is performing their function adequately, this frequency could drop off to 1 to 3 times per week. – 2 to 5 times per week should be maintained throughout the life of the project for short duration projects (single season construction). Note: Auditors should also maintain an electronic or hard copy diary for those days that audits are not performed (an Inspector’s Daily Report narrative section or PE diary are good formats).
• Each audit should contain between 5 to 15 questions or audit items. – Single audit item audits (cherry picking) tend to only note non-conformance and should only be used when the WSDOT Engineer, the Lead Auditor, or both agree with the auditor that this format is appropriate to the issue in question.
• Those audit items pertain to the work which: – Has been completed to that point; or – Is ongoing that requires certain intermediate steps (Hold Points) be completed prior to the work being completed.
• Each audit item has an “Observations” area or box that allows the auditor to document their observations regarding the specifics of conformance/ non-conformance.
• Each audit item has an “Accepted” area or box where there are three options that you can select: “Yes”, “No”, or “N/A”. – Each audit item that receives a “Yes” means that, by the auditor’s observation, the work meets contract requirements. – Each audit item that receives a “No” means that, by the auditor’s observation, the work does not meet contract requirements and is an NCI.
• QV audits should examine all phases of the QA and QC work or processes in: – Quality
– Construction
– Design
– Business
– Environmental
– Materials
QV audit questions should pertain to the deliverable function of the work or process:
• Who was doing the work: Design-Builder, subcontractor, vendor, laboratory, consultant, QA, QC, or production? – Was this who should have been doing the work?
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-15
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/Implementation
• What work was being done? – This is where the auditor discusses what was observed.
• Where was the work being done? – Was the location in conformance with the requirements?
• When did it happen? – Date and time, especially if the aspect is time critical.
• Why was the work being done in the manner it was?
• How was the work being done? – Was the work completed in conformance with the requirements? The WSDOT Engineer will perform an on-site evaluation of the Material Testing Laboratory, in accordance with WSDOT Standard Practice QC 3, Quality System Laboratory Review, in the WSDOT Materials Manual M 46-01, to ensure that all work is being performed according to the contract. The evaluation will include audit and inspection functions, review of training, equipment calibration, verification of records, and observance of testers as they perform the test procedures. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information. The QMP describes the procedures for auditing and checking conformance with working drawings and the distribution to the WSDOT Engineer for Review and Comment. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information on working drawing reviews and audits. WSDOT will periodically audit the field performance of the Design-Builder’s QA organization, testing frequencies, and acceptance testing results. The WSDOT Engineer will conduct oversight inspection audits to verify the adequacy of the Design-Builder’s inspection activities and testing procedures. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information. The Design-Builder and its subcontractors will provide adequate facilities acceptable to WSDOT for the audit during normal business hours. The Design-Builder and all subcontractors will cooperate with WSDOT auditors. Refer to RFP Section 1-09.12, for further information.
7-8.1.2
Construction Audit Tracking System
WSDOT began development of CATS software in 2005 to give staff a tool for QV audit tracking in design-build projects. In the design-build project delivery model, WSDOT no longer leads QA inspection/acceptance processes but, rather, verifies that those processes are taking place. WSDOT recognized that an audit system needed to be developed to facilitate the capture of frequent snapshots in time and the oversight of progress in design-build projects. This was important so that the agency could verify that quality requirements were being met within reasonable conformance with the RFP.
Page 7-16
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-8.1.3
Chapter 7
How Do I Start?
In the case of the project office, take Chapters 1 and 2 of the RFP and search (Ctrl-F) for all of the “shall” statements. These are the requirements or deliverables through which you assess the Design-Builder’s conformance, processes, and end products. Do yourself a favor and highlight all of the occurrences of “shall” in the Microsoft Word documents or PDFs of the RFP.
7-8.1.4
Where Do I Start?
You will look in the General Provisions for administration or business requirements. RFP Chapter 2 is where the Technical Requirements are spelled out for each discipline specific criteria. Think of these as if they were the amendments to the Standard Specifications and Special Provisions. These requirements spell out the contract as it is to be administered. The discipline-specific chapters of RFP Chapter 2 also outline the Mandatory Standards required for use in design, environmental, quality, and construction facets of the project.
7-8.1.5
When Do I Start?
As soon as you have conformed RFP documents in electronic form, begin to develop your PE checklists for use in CATS. It works best if you initially develop your audit questions offline in a spreadsheet. The Construction Division’s Design-Build Quality Manager (DBQM) has a spreadsheet template specifically created for this purpose. Plan on spending approximately 20-40 hours to develop your PE checklists.
7-8.1.6
Why Do I Start?
CATS is a unified, Standard Specifications-based auditing software system that provides WSDOT management with unbiased, at-a-glance assessments of auditing and reporting status through various summary reports.
7-8.1.7
Entering a New Design-Build Project into CATS
Enter the contract/work order into the “Contract Info” page of CATS by clicking the “Add New Contract” button. In the work order field, enter your six-digit contract number (using leading zeroes as needed). Next, type in the project title as it appears on the WSDOT Construction Office’s Design-Build website. Then type in the “Orgcode”. Click the “Save” button. After a successful save, the system will respond, “Data saved successfully.” Type in the “Award Date”. To type in the “Spec Book Version”. Use the one listed in the conformed appendices usually B1 or D18. Type in the “Prime Contractor” and their email address. Click the “Save” button.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-17
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-8.1.8
Headquarters Audit Types, Disciplines, and Sub-Categories
The DBQM has an extensive list of audit types to choose from that were established over the history of the CATS program’s use. After many years of use, the following audit types have become most prevalent:
• Inspection (Catch all for most field observations)
• QMP or Quality (Process-oriented audits of QA)
• Design (Through all stages of development: over-the-shoulder, preliminary, final, and RFC)
• Business (contract administration)
• Environmental (Everything short of an environmental compliance assurance procedure)
• Maintenance of Traffic (MOT)
• Documentation (RAM, Record of Materials, and QPL review)
• Materials (Region IA inspector observations)
7-8.1.9
Headquarters Checklists
HQ checklists are developed from the construction requirements of the Standard Specifications Divisions 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. The requisite “shall” statements are copied into the checklist. In order to convert the “shall” statements into audit questions, the checklist editor appends each “shall” statement with “Was this requirement met?” See the PE checklists section below for an example. To ensure statewide consistency, HQ checklists are developed and maintained by WSDOT HQ Construction Division.
7-8.1.10
Project Engineer Disciplines and Sub-Categories
Simply, these are the General Provisions, Technical Requirements, QMP requirements, and Betterments in an outline, bulleted format for database organizational purposes. WSDOT auditors choose from HQ audit types like; Betterments, QMP, materials, environmental, inspection (catch-all for field work), MOT, geotechnical design, public information, roadway design, project documentation, stormwater management, roadside restoration design, and so on.
7-8.1.11
Project Engineer Checklists
PE checklists are organized using the RFP’s organizational structure (sections and subsections) as the basis of the for audit folder and subfolder organization. For example: Section 2.28 is titled, “Quality Management Plan”, subsection 2.28.1 is titled, “General”, Subsection 2.28.1.2 is titled, “Pre-Activity Meetings”
Page 7-18
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
Chapter 7
These are your audit type, discipline, and sub-category, respectively. Once the checklist structure is defined, audit questions may be created as follows: 1. Identify contract requirements by looking for “shall” statements in the RFP, QMP, Betterments list, and any other source of contract requirements. 2. Copy each requirement verbatim, skip a line, and ask, “Was this requirement met?” For example: The Design-Builder shall hold pre-activity meetings to ensure that all Project personnel have a thorough understanding of the Work to be accomplished prior to beginning construction on a Work activity. Was this requirement met?
7-8.1.12
Scheduled Activities
This is where the scheduled activity numbers and descriptions from the baseline schedule, as submitted by the Design-Builder, are input into CATS. The schedule can either be copy and pasted into CATS one activity at a time or it can be sent to WSDOT’s IT helpdesk for batch uploading.
7-8.1.13
Work Locations
Each element of work’s location is defined with a primary location, a primary and secondary location, or a primary, secondary, and tertiary location. This is where the work is to be audited. Note: Work locations can be refined even further with stations and offsets.
7-8.1.14
Associate Scheduled Activities and Work Locations
Tie work locations to scheduled activities. Audit scope is defined by specific scheduled activities that are paired or associated with specific work locations. Multiple scheduled activities may be paired or associated with common work locations. For example: preliminary, over-the-shoulder, final, and RFC audits could all be performed at a co-located office. Other activities and locations may have a one-off usage. For example, “Signal turn-on” would be paired or associated with the project’s only signalized “intersection” (primary) at “32nd St. SE” (secondary) in the intersection’s NW quadrant (tertiary).
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-19
Chapter 7
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-8.1.15
Audit Plans (not part of CATS)
Audit plans are to be developed by each design-build PE’s office. The PE, Lead Auditor, and auditors need to identify the areas of work where the greatest risk of failure is and then to place emphasis on auditing those areas more frequently. Lessons learned should play into every audit plan. Talk to experienced auditors in current design-build projects. These individuals have profound knowledge regarding the who, what, where, when, why, and how of a project’s day-to-day operation. If there are work elements that are known to frequently fall outside contract requirements, then those elements should require a greater level of scrutiny, dependent on the risk level associated with non-conformance. Namely, these would include items identified in the pre-approved corrective action plans described in RFP Section 2.28.1.11. Audit priorities need to be bulleted in an outline format and expanded to encompass the work. Prioritize each of the specific bullet points according to risk. Once the QV team reaches a consensus and agrees on the priority ranking, audit preparation may begin. Auditing should be a matter of fact, “Did the Design-Builder comply with the contract requirement or not?”
• If the Design-Builder did, there is compliance.
• If the Design-Builder did not, there is a NCI. NCIs should not be primarily considered a deficiency. They should be considered a learning tool. For each NCI, the Design-Builder must provide a corrective action plan along with the repair, re-work, remediation, removal, or replacement of non-conforming work.
7-8.1.16
Prepare Audit
Once the QV team has studied the audit plan, they should review the work to be verified, be it design, business, environmental, quality, or construction and then pull related questions from the HQ or PE checklists. If the QV team helped assemble the PE checklist then they will have a far better grasp of the requirements or deliverables that need verification or oversight. The knowledge of both contract requirements and the audit plan should give the QV team insight into the elements of work that have the greatest risk of failure. Initially, the Lead Auditor needs to be responsible for preparing audits as they should have a better feel for the aspects being audited. As experience and confidence are exhibited by the auditors, they should be given this task along with expectations of performance.
Page 7-20
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-8.1.17
Chapter 7
Perform Audit
Invariably, auditors will begin to build audits that have a great deal of content but, sometimes, are not entirely applicable to the work being audited. It is best, at least initially, to have auditors export their draft audits from CATS to PDFs using the “View Current Audit Items” radio button and the “Preview” button. Bring the draft audit PDF to the audit site and determine which audit questions should be deleted or deferred. This goal is to ask only relevant audit questions. By doing this, “N/A” acceptance findings should be eliminated. Armed with a relevant set of audit questions, you may now perform your audit. Sometimes audit questions can be answered with only a visual verification of conformance with requirements. Other audit questions require more coordination with the Design-Builder. In either case, the auditor needs to document their observations and determine the level of acceptance: “Yes”, “No”, or “N/A”.
7-8.2
Non-Conforming Work Non-conforming work is work performed that does not meet the requirements of the contract. Auditors determine non-conforming work by identifying objective evidence that the finished product does not conform to a stated contract requirement. Objective evidence is evidence that directly relates to the Design-Builder’s fulfillment of a contract requirement and does not include opinion, commentary, or grievance. Refer to the General Provisions, for further information on non-conforming work. Audit questions that result in an acceptance code of “No” will automatically generate NCIs. NCIs require the same review and ultimate closure as NCRs generated by the CQAM. Refer to RFP Section 2.28 for further information.
7-9
FHWA Audits FHWA audits will be performed in accordance with the Stewardship and Oversight Agreement (executed on 2015-03-15 between the FHWA and WSDOT) and as authorized by the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA); 49 CFR 18.26; OMB Circular A-87, A-123, 133, 127; GAAP; Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act of 1990; and DOT Order 8000 1C.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 7-21
Chapter 7
7-10
Contract Administration/Implementation
Change Orders The change order process in design-build delivery differs significantly from that in designbid-build (DBB) delivery. For the most part design-build contracts are lump sum based, and design-bid-build contracts are unit price based. Therefore, in design-build delivery, instead of relying on contractually set unit pricing, change order costs must be negotiated. The fact that the Design-Builder performs much of the design work further complicates the change order process. As part of contract management, it is important that WSDOT maintain a conformed contract that reflects all changes to the contract documents because of change orders, regardless of which party initiates the changes. Maintaining a conformed contract ensures that all parties are working off the most updated contract requirements throughout the implementation of the project. At the end of the project, the conformed contract becomes part of the final record of the project and reflects the administration of the project.
7-10.1
Change Order A change order can be described as a written amendment to the contract. Approved change orders are a legal part of the contract documents and are treated just like the original contract documents. The intent of the contract documents is that the Design-Builder undertake full responsibility for delivery of the project. The contract documents do not provide details of design necessary to carry out the intent of the contract documents. Such detailed designs are the sole responsibility of the Design-Builder to develop. WSDOT wants the Design-Builder to have flexibility in determining how best to design and construct the project. This must be done within the parameters established by the contract, unless WSDOT approval is granted for contract modifications. WSDOT’s internal process for design-build contract modification approval and execution authority will adhere to the requirements detailed in this chapter and in the contract. Contract modifications can be unilateral or bilateral, but bilateral modifications are always preferred.
7-10.1.1
Types of Change Order
• WSDOT-Initiated Change Order
• Design-Builder-Initiated Change Order
7-10.1.2
WSDOT-Initiated Change Orders
WSDOT reserves the right to authorize and/or require contract modifications in the work within the general scope of the contract as provided in RFP Section 1-04.4(1).
Page 7-22
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Contract Administration/Implementation
7-10.1.3
Chapter 7
Design-Builder-Initiated Change Orders
It is the desire of WSDOT to allow the Design-Builder to have significant flexibility in determining how best to design and construct the project, within the parameters established by the contract documents. The Design-Builder is encouraged to propose changes whenever it identifies potential savings. The approval of a Design-BuilderInitiated change is at WSDOT’s sole discretion. RFP Section 1-04.4(2) of the contract sets forth the requirements for a Design-Builder-Initiated change.
7-11
Construction Contracts Information System Database The Construction Contracts Information System (CCIS) is a mainframe application designed to track contract information and generate reports for all WSDOT administered construction projects. The initial setup of contract information into CCIS is done automatically by using information in the Contract Administration and Payment System. However, after the initial setup, the project offices enter the majority of the contract information into the CCIS system. The data entered is then maintained and stored on the mainframe. For more information on CCIS see the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01, and the CCIS manual. All design-build contract Category A and B Requirement changes will be entered into CCIS and may be changed only through Value Engineering Change Proposals or WSDOT-Directed Changes, and Category B Requirements may be changed only through Category B Change Proposals or WSDOT-Directed Changes. Category A and Category B Changes WSDOT approval is required with respect to any proposed changes in the Category A and B Requirements. Section 1-04.4 of the General Provisions sets forth the requirements applicable to requests for modifications in Category A and B Requirements submitted by the Design-Builder. The requirements of the contract documents are designated as either “Category A Requirements” or “Category B Requirements” in accordance with the following table: Contract Requirement Designation
Change Category
Chapter 1 General Provisions Chapter 2 Technical Requirements - Mandatory Standards (Except the Standard Specifications) Chapter 2 Technical Requirements - All except Mandatory Standards Standard Specifications Special Provisions Amendments to the Standard Specifications Proposal Documents Basic Configuration
Category A
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Category A Category B Category B Category B Category B Category A Category A
Page 7-23
Chapter 7
7-12
Contract Administration/Implementation
Payments
7-12.1
Progress Payments The Design-Builder shall submit monthly invoices to WSDOT on a mutually agreed date that is consistent with the progress payment cutoff date set by WSDOT. No payment item shall be included on an invoice for work that has been documented as deficient by the Design-Builder’s QA organization. If requested by WSDOT, the Design-Builder shall provide separate invoices for work subject to reimbursement by the Federal government or third parties. Such invoices shall be organized to meet all applicable reimbursement requirements and to facilitate the reimbursement process. No invoice will be processed until WSDOT has received the documents required in the contract. The invoice value will be based on the agreed upon progress for the contract schedule activities as outlined in RFP Sections 1-08.3 and 1-09.9. WSDOT will simultaneously review each invoice and progress report in detail and then process the invoice for payment. Partial Payments will be made once each month. If WSDOT questions or disputes any item, it will redline the item and refer the item back to the Design-Builder for resolution before payment. WSDOT will deduct from the payment the value of the items not resolved to its satisfaction before the payment date. Refer to RFP Section 1-09 for further information on payments, invoices, and documents submitted with invoices.
7-12.2
Processing Liquidated Damages There are two types of liquidated damages: contract time and miscellaneous. Refer to the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01, for further information on how to process these two types of liquidated damages.
7-13
Final Documents and Meetings for Close Out Final Design Documents, As Builts, and construction document submittals are discussed in Chapter 8 of this manual and in RFP Section 2.12. The Design-Builder will establish Close Out Task Force meetings to oversee and provide input on developing final Design Documentation and final permanent and temporary construction records. At a minimum, Close Out Task Force meetings shall include the PQM, DCM, PM, DM, and the WSDOT Engineer.
Page 7-24
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Chapter 8 8-1
Project Acceptance and Close Out
Introduction This chapter discusses key dates of acceptance in a design-build project. This chapter also discusses the close out and acceptance of final project documentation for both design and construction and defines the responsibilities the Design-Builder has concerning project documentation, and the responsibilities of WSDOT for project documentation and retention of documents. Section 2.1 requires the Design-Builder to use an electronic Document Control System (DCS) to track and manage project documentation through the design and construction phases of the project. It is a best practice to start the compilation of final design documentation and final construction documentation early in a project. Planning for close out of documentation should start at the beginning of the project. The Design-Builder is required to establish a close out task force meeting to oversee and provide input on developing design and construction documentation. These meetings begin monthly, shortly after Notice to Proceed (NTP) is given, and continue monthly until Substantial Completion given, and then weekly through Completion. Meeting personnel will include, at a minimum, Project Quality Manager, Document Control Manager, Project Manager, Design Manager and WSDOT Engineer.
8-2
Project Acceptance 8-2.1
Completion and Final Acceptance Project Acceptance is when Completion and final acceptance of the contract occurs. Final acceptance is given as the date the Final Contract Voucher Certificate (FCVC) is signed by the Secretary (or designee). The signing accepts that all obligations of the contract are complete and acknowledges the final amount due to Design-Builder. Failure of the Design-Builder to perform all the obligations under the contract shall not prevent WSDOT from unilaterally accepting the contract as provided in Section 1-09.9(2). The FCVC is part of the Final Estimate Package. The WSDOT Engineer will create and transmit the Final Estimate Package for signature. Refer to Final Estimate – Contract Acceptance in SS 1-09.0 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 for information on what documents are required in the Final Estimate Package, the transmittal of the package, and who reviews and signs the FCVC. In order for the project Completion Date to be established, all the physical work on the project must be completed, and the Design-Builder must have furnished all documentation required by the contract. This includes all approved Affidavits of Wages Paid, and the signed FCVC. (Note: Establish the Completion Date as soon as the last item of paper work is received.)
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 8-1
Chapter 8
Project Acceptance and Close Out
WSDOT will give the Design-Builder written notice of the Completion Date of the contract after all of the Design-Builder’s obligations under the contract (with the exception of warranty work) have been performed by the Design-Builder. Completion of the contract shall occur within 90 calendar days of Physical Completion. The following events must occur before the Completion Date can be established: 1. The work on the project must be complete pursuant to the contract documents. 2. The Design-Builder must furnish all documentation required by the contract and required by law. Refer to the Section 1-08.5, General Provisions for more information, and SS 1-08.5 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 for more information on Completion.
8-2.2
Physical Completion Physical Completion occurs prior to Completion and final acceptance of the contract, and is given when Design-Builder has achieved the following:
• Completed all construction work
• Satisfied all conditions for acceptance by utility owners
• Satisfied all requirements regarding Final Cleanup pursuant to Section 1-04.11, General Provisions
• Furnished the Design Documentation Package and Project File as required in Section 2.12, Project Documentation, and as noted further in this chapter The Design-Builder will notify WSDOT when all of the above referenced conditions have been met. Upon receipt of the notice, WSDOT will perform final inspection pursuant to Section 1-05.11. Should WSDOT identify any defects or deficiencies in the work, the Design-Builder shall immediately remedy such defects or deficiencies at no additional cost. Upon full compliance with bulleted items listed above, the WSDOT Engineer will give the Design-Builder written notice of the Physical Completion Date for the contract. Refer to the Section 1-08.5, General Provisions, of the RFP, and SS 1-08.5 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 for more information on Substantial and Physical Completion.
8-2.3
Substantial Completion Substantial Completion occurs prior to Physical Completion. Before Substantial Completion will be given by the WSDOT Engineer, the Design-Builder is required to notify the WSDOT Engineer that the following have occurred prior to Substantial Completion: The Design-Builder has completed all site work such that WSDOT and the traveling public have full and unrestricted use and benefit of the facilities from both the operational and safety standpoint, and only minor incidental work, replacement of temporary substitute facilities, or correction or repair remains for the Physical Completion of the total contract.
• The Design-Builder has ensured that all work completed to achieve Substantial Completion has been performed in accordance with the requirements of the contract documents.
Page 8-2
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Project Acceptance and Close Out
Chapter 8
• The Design-Builder has ensured that the facilities may be operated without damage to the project or any other property on or off the project site, and without injury to any person.
• The Design-Builder has obtained all design and construction approvals by utility owners.
• The Design-Builder has ensured that the facilities are ready to be opened for public traffic and that remaining work can be completed within single lane or shoulder closures between times given in the RFP, in accordance with the Technical Requirements of the RFP. Upon compliance with all requirements noted above, the WSDOT Engineer will grant the Design-Builder written notice of the Substantial Completion Date. Substantial Completion is often linked to contract insurance requirements, therefore the Contract Administration and Payment System (CAPS) Unit of Accountability and Financial Service (AFS) must be notified of the Substantial Completion Date (email to caps@wsdot.wa.gov). Refer to the Section 1-08.5, General Provisions, for more information on Substantial and Physical Completion and SS 1-08.5 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01.
8-3
Close Out of Final Design Documentation All documentation for design need to be submitted for review in accordance with the Quality Management Plan (QMP), as described in Section 2.28. The QMP includes an organization chart of the Quality Assurance (QA) and Quality Control (QC) personnel for design of the project and their responsibilities along with the lines of authority for each employee. The final design documents need to reflect the actual condition of the constructed work, to the same degree of detail as the Request for Construction (RFC) documents. It is the responsibility of the Design-Builder to do all work necessary to complete the required documentation for the design and construction of the project, and to obtain WSDOT acceptance of the final project documentation.
8-3.1
Design Documentation Package The Design-Builder will prepare a Design Documentation Package (DDP) for the project. The DDP preserves the major decision documents generated during the design process and is retained for 75 years. The DDP documents explain design decisions, design criteria, and the design process that was followed. In each DDP, a summary (list) of the documents in the DDP is required. The summary (list) is the DDP checklist. The DDP checklist is an appendix to the RFP and can is further discussed in Chapter 300 of the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 8-3
Chapter 8
Project Acceptance and Close Out
The DDP will include signed and approved cover pages of the Design Approval. In a design-build project, the Design Approval is completed prior to issuing a RFP. A copy of the Design Approval can be found in the appendices of the RFP. Environmental documentation completion is recommended to be complete prior to issuing an RFP, if not, it is required prior to Execution.
8-3.2
Project File The Project File (PF) contains the remaining project documentation that is pertinent to construction, but not necessary to be retained for 75 years. This will include documentation for planning, scoping, programming, design, contract assembly, utility relocation, needed Right of Way, advertisement, award, construction, and maintenance review comments for a project. The PF is completed for all projects. The PF will include all applicable components identified in the WSDOT Project File Checklist, Refer to RFP appendices for Project File Checklist, or the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01. Elements that do not apply to the project are to be noted on the checklist with clarifying statements explaining why they are not applicable. The Design-Builder needs to obtain copies of WSDOT generated information created during the Conceptual Design that may not be included in the original Request for Proposal, but are needed by the Design-Builder in order to complete the DDP and PF items. The DDP and PF are to be maintained throughout the project by the Design-Builder. For additional DDP and PF submittal requirements, refer to Section 2.12, Project Documentation, and Chapter 300 of the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01.
8-3.3
Project Development Approval Significant revisions to the concept design as documented in the Design Approval shall be noted and updated in the Project Development Approval (PDA). The Design-Builder is required to submit a draft of the PDA within 60 calendar days of the last RFC design submittal. The WSDOT Engineer will Review and Comment within 25 calendar days. All comments shall be resolved before the PDA is finalized and submitted to the WSDOT Engineer for approval. The WSDOT Engineer’s approval is required prior to Completion. When all project development documents are completed and approved, the PDA is approved. The PDA Approval becomes part of the DDP. It is a best practice to start the compilation of design documentation early in a project and to acquire PDA before the Completion of the project. Refer to Section 2.12, Project Documentation; and Chapter 300 of the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01 for more information on what needs to be contained in the DPA.
Page 8-4
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Project Acceptance and Close Out
8-3.4
Chapter 8
Technical Memoranda The Design-Builder is required to provide technical memoranda that document decisions made during completion of the design regarding components not included in the Mandatory Standards. The memoranda shall be provided with associated preliminary design documents at the task force meetings. Technical memoranda shall be dated, indicate the project title, and include the stamp and signature of a Licensed Professional Engineer. Technical memoranda need to follow the format shown in Section 2.12.
8-3.5
Design Analyses A Design Analysis is a process and tool used to document important design decisions, summarizing information needed for an approving authority to understand and support the decision. A Design Analysis is required where a dimension chosen for a design element that will be changed by the project is outside the range of values provided for that element in the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01. In design-build contracts, there can be a Pre-Approved Design Analyses prepared and made part of the RFP appendices. If required, the Design-Builder shall update the Pre-Approved Design Analyses by preparing documentation that conforms to the Chapter 300 of the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01, uses the Design Analysis template, and submitting this documentation to the WSDOT Engineer for review and approval. The Design-Builder shall conduct all work necessary to complete the Design Analyses for the project. All Design Analyses shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Licensed Professional Engineer. The cover of each Design Analysis shall carry the Licensed Professional Engineer’s stamp and signature. Design Analyses approved after contract award will be addressed in accordance with Section 1-04 of the General Provisions. Refer to Section 2.12, Project Documentation, and Chapter 300 of the WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01 for further information.
8-3.6
WSDOT Quality Verification Design Documentation The design document deliverables from the Design-Builder will often be submitted to the WSDOT Engineer in partial submittal packages for review in the months leading up to the contract Physical Completion, when the entire submittal is due. A best practice is to have the WSDOT Quality Verification (QV) teams review and verify those partial submittals as they are submitted, so that the majority of the final submittal at Physical Completion has been previously reviewed and verified. For some design documentation (i.e. additional Design Analyses is a good example) the WSDOT QV personnel may need to coordinate between the Design-Builder, HQ Design and FHWA to ensure FHWA is appropriately involved in the approval process if the contract has FHWA Federal-aid or Federal oversight.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 8-5
Chapter 8
Project Acceptance and Close Out
During the production of these design documents, WSDOT QV personnel may apply the QV Audit processes in their review of the documents to determine if the deliverables meet contract requirement. The CATS Audit System is used to document any such WSDOT audits. Upon final submittal of the Documents, the WSDOT Engineer will need to ensure completeness of the Documents. WSDOT QV efforts may require locating and providing the Design-Builder with design documents that WSDOT prepared either prior to or during the design-build contract. Therefore, discussions with the WSDOT design team, early in life of contract, on obtaining those design documents can be beneficial for later in the contract.
8-3.7
Approval and Retention of Final Design Documentation Prior to Physical Completion or termination of the contract, the Design-Builder is required to submit all design documents prepared in the performance of the contract. The final design documents shall include, at a minimum, the following:
• DDP including a copy of the original DA and PDA
• PF
• Updated electronic Micro Station and InRoads files in accordance with the WSDOT Electronic Engineering Data Standards (copy in RFP appendices), including all RFC sheets, reference files, and base mapping (topography, including survey updates). The final design documents need to reflect the actual condition of the constructed work, to the same degree of detail as the RFC documents. The WSDOT Engineer will review the submittal and advise the Design-Builder of their acceptance of the final design documents or will provide comments detailing issues to be resolved. The Design-Builder shall address all comments in a manner consistent with the comment resolution process outlined in the Design-Builders QMP, and then resubmit the final design documents to the WSDOT Engineer. The WSDOT Engineer’s approval is required prior to Completion. Once the DDP is approved by the WSDOT Engineer, the WSDOT Engineer is responsible for assuring the DDP is retained in a permanent retrievable file for a period of 75 years, in accordance with the WSDOT records retention policy. Once the PF is approved by the WSDOT Engineer, with the exception of the DDP, the WSDOT Engineer can purge the PF when retention of the final temporary construction records are no longer necessary. Once the PDA is complete and approved by the WSDOT Engineer, it remains valid for a period of 3 years.
Page 8-6
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Project Acceptance and Close Out
8-4
Chapter 8
Close Out of Final Construction Documentation 8-4.1
As Built Plans As Built drawings should reflect the same degree of detail as the awarded plan drawings or Released for Construction (RFC) drawings. As Built plans are necessary as a way of preserving the historical detail of what occurred on the project. As Built plans can also be used as a basis to plan and design future projects in the same location and to make repairs to damaged structural components or other non-functioning facilities. In addition, State law RCW 19.122.020(23), requires that owners of “underground facilities” be able to locate these facilities within 24 inches of the outside dimensions. As Built plans offer a convenient means for recording these facilities. Prior to Physical Completion of the contract, the Design-Builder shall update and re-release all RFC plans affected by significant revisions made during construction in accordance with Section 2.28. Revisions to the RFC plans are to be performed by, or under the direct supervision of, the Engineer of Record (EOR). Re-issued RFC plans will need to include the professional engineer’s stamp and signature. The As Built plans will reflect the detail of the RFC plans and will be submitted to the WSDOT Engineer for review. Refer to Section 2.12, Project Documentation, for more information on preparing, compiling, numbering, and marking of As Built plans.
8-4.1.1
Acceptance and Retention of As Built Plans
Once As Built plans are compiled by the Design-Builder, they will be submitted to the WSDOT Engineer for Review and Comment. The WSDOT Engineer will advise the Design-Builder of acceptance or will provide comments detailing issues to be resolved. The Design-Builder will address all comments in a manner consistent with the comment resolution process outlined in the Design-Builder’s QMP, and then resubmit the final As Built plans. The WSDOT Engineer’s approval is required prior to Completion. Once the WSDOT Engineer accepts and approves As Built plans from Design-Builder, the WSDOT Engineer will be responsible for submitting As Built plans to HQ Engineering Records for retention. Refer to Section 10-3.11A of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 on preparing and submitting As Built plans to HQ Engineering Records. Retention of As Built plans are stored in ILinx or silverfiled for 75 years at HQ Engineering Record Services.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 8-7
Chapter 8
Project Acceptance and Close Out
8-4.2
Construction Final Records All records that are created during the administration of a construction contract can be placed in one of two categories, Permanent Records, records kept by the Headquarters and State Archives for future reference, and Temporary Records, records kept by the Region for a limited period of time after which the Region discards them. The Design-Builder is required to conduct all work necessary to provide construction temporary and permanent final records. These records will include field books, inspector’s record of field tests, project and inspector’s diaries, Inspector’s Daily Reports (IDR)s, invoices, weigh bills, contaminated material disposal bills, item quantity tickets, receiving reports, project ledgers, mass diagrams, plotted cross-sections, computer listings, working profiles, and any other documents that could be considered a basis of payment for work performed or materials furnished. Section 2.12, Project Documentation and Section 10.3 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 provides further descriptions and examples of temporary and permanent final records. The Design-Builder is required to submit final records to the WSDOT Engineer prior to Completion or termination of the contract. The Design-Builder shall prepare and submit final records as shown in Section 2.12, Project Documentation.
8-4.2.1
Permanent Final Records
The Design-Builder is responsible to provide permanent final records to be assembled and numbered as required in Section 2.12, Project Documentation prior to Completion or termination of the contract. Section 10.3 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 allows permanent final records to be either paper or electronic. To submit electronically, two requirements must be met: 1. The project must be in CCIS 2. All final records must be filed electronically If the Design-Builder chooses to submit electronic permanent final records, WSDOT Information Technology (IT) ECM Support must be contacted to request an Enterprise Management Content (ECM) set-up for use. If the Design-Builder choses to submit electronic permanent final records, the WSDOT Engineer staff may want to assist the Design-Builder in setting up the ECM by contacting IT by email. The IT email address is given in the ECM User Guide, which is discussed further in this section. Once contacted, IT establishes a directory to deposit the files. The directory contains a folder for each of the eight books, with additional subfolders as needed for each document type. Refer to the ECM User Guide, which is available in folder titled, My Favorites at web address http://wsdotecm/Portal for instructions on use of the Electronic of the directory and filing of records. Section 10-3 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 also provides further information on electronic permanent final records.
Page 8-8
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Project Acceptance and Close Out
Chapter 8
Section 2.12, Project Documentation provides a list of the numbered permanent final record books. The following provides a short description of those books. Refer also to Section 10-3 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. Final Record, Book 1 is the first book of the permanent final records for a construction contract. It contains indices to the records that have been compiled for both permanent and temporary final records. It also identifies Key Personnel that have worked on the project and provides specific summary information. Final Record Book No. 1 is to be signed by the Regional Administrator or designee. Final Record Book No. 1 should contain a title sheet (DOT Form 422-009) and should be assembled with a semi rigid, water resistant cover. 1. Index – Section 1 of Final Record Book No. 1 is the first of two indices within Final Record Book 1. It is an index or detailed listing showing the various sections of Final Record Book No. 1 itself. An example of an index for Final Record Book No. 1 can be found in Figure 10-2 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. The second index is actually the first section of the book. It provides a detailed listing of all records that have been kept and assembled for the project, including both permanent records and temporary records. An example of this index can be seen in Figure 10-3 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. 2. Design-Builder Project Personnel List – Section 2 of Final Record Book No. 1 contains a copy of the listing of all design-build personnel assigned to the project and their classifications. The list should contain the name and classification of managers, supervisors, supervisors, testers, engineers, and any other Design-Builder personnel who were responsible for signing documents or forms or were responsible for decision-making on the project. Each person noted should place their identifying signature and initials after their name on the listing in the same manner as it appears in other final record documents. WSDOT Form 422-001 can be used as a guide in creating a Project Personnel Signature Listing. 3. Comparison of Quantities – Section 3 of Final Record Book No. 1. Not required for design-build projects. 4. Final Estimate Sheets – Section 4 of Final Record Book No. 1 contains a copy of the Final Contract Voucher Certification (FCVC), which will be prepared by WSDOT and provided to Design-Builder for review and signature. 5. Contract Estimate Payment Totals – Section 5 of Final Record Book No.1 contains a copy of the CAPS report obtained from the final estimate. This document will be given to Design-Builder by WSDOT. See Section 10-3.15 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 for further information. 6. Change Orders – Section 6 of Final Records Book No. 1 contains a listing of all change orders prepared for the completed project. 7. Record of Construction Materials – Section 7 of Final Records Book No. 1 contains a tabulation showing the source of all construction materials. For design-build contracts, this would be a copy of the Design-Builders Record of Materials (ROM). See Section 2.25, Control of Materials for additional information.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 8-9
Chapter 8
Project Acceptance and Close Out
When preparing the individual Final Record Books, other than Book No. 1, it is not necessary to label pages within each book. Where it is appropriate, a table of contents may be added to identify sections within a particular book. Project Engineer’s Diaries, Book 2 A complete, well-kept Project Engineer’s Diary is a valuable administrative tool. Diaries done by both the Design-Builder and the WSDOT Engineer are filed in this book. See Section 10-3.6A of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 for more information on what should be included in the Project Engineer’s Diary. WSDOT Form 422-014 is available for use for Project Engineer’s Diaries. Inspector’s Daily Report, Book 3 IDRs are permanent final records and shall include the key points of record. Each of the Quality Assurance (QA) inspectors shall summarize their daily inspections, tests, and material sampling activities in an IDR, in accordance with Section 2.28. The QA inspectors shall use WSDOT’s Inspector’s Daily Report, DOT Form 422-004, 422-004A, and 422004B, or a similar form approved by the WSDOT Engineer, to maintain a written record of inspection results, and shall provide copies of the daily reports to the WSDOT Engineer the next business day. The QV inspector’s IDRs will also be filed in this book. The WSDOT Engineer will include or provide to the Design-Builder the QV IDRs for inclusion in this book. Refer to Section 10-3 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 for further information. Subject to the following, it is acceptable for Quality Assurance (QA) inspectors to produce IDR’s by recording information onto a recording device while at the job site for later transcription to a paper format: 1. All information required on the regular handwritten form must appear on the typed version. 2. The QA inspector must read and sign the typed document. (It is desirable for this to take place within 24 to 48 hours of the reporting period. However, it is recognized that certain situations may not permit this time frame and therefore it is not mandatory). 3. The QA inspector may make and initial hand corrections to the typed document. Please note that inspectors who use lap top computers can also produce electronic versions of the IDR document. The electronically produced document must be complete, including the inspector identification block (the old signature block), consistent with the above criteria.
Page 8-10
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Project Acceptance and Close Out
Chapter 8
Contractor’s Daily Report of Traffic Control, Book 4 WSDOT Form 421-040A and 421-040B, Contractor’s Daily Report of Traffic Control, are completed by the Design-Builder’s Traffic Control Supervisor and included as part of the Project’s Permanent Final Records. The Contractor’s Daily Report of Traffic Control is discussed in more detail in Section SS 1-10 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. Pile Driving Records, Book 5 The Pile Driving Record DOT Form 450-004 or Pile Driving Log DOT Form 450-004A should be included and made a part of the Permanent Final Records. The requirements for pile driving and pile driving records are further detailed in Chapter 6 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. Post Tensioning Records, Book 6 The Post Tensioning Record DOT Form 450-005 should be included and made a part of the Permanent Final Records. The requirements for post tensioning and post tensioning records are further detailed in Chapter 6 of the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01. Contaminated Material Disposal Bills, Book 7 These records can consist of disposal invoices paid to take contaminated materials. Miscellaneous Records, Book 8
• As Built plans
• Completed Shop Drawings
• Section 2.12, Project Documentation identifies key documents for miscellaneous records, however miscellaneous records can also include other optional records that the WSDOT Engineer and Design-Builder feel of significant importance and should be part of the permanent records. Optional records can include correspondence or photographs deemed significantly important such as articles or photographs regarding project openings to public use or dedication. Placing these in the permanent final records will make them a matter of permanent record where they will be retained for future reference. Material Certification At the conclusion of the contract, the Design-Builder shall submit a final Materials Certification Checklist to the WSDOT Engineer. The materials certification is to be signed by the EOR, and the Construction Quality Assurance Manager (CQAM). The DesignBuilder may use the Contract Materials Checklist Form (DOT Form 350-115) or develop its own checklist with the same information as part of the Material Certification Package. The Materials Certification Package shall include all necessary supporting documentation. This documentation shall consist of all documentation practices used for material acceptance, and an explanation of any deficiencies noted in the checklist. The summary of this documentation shall be organized in an order similar to Division 9 of the Standard Specifications.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 8-11
Chapter 8
Project Acceptance and Close Out
8-4.2.1.1
Acceptance and Retention of Permanent Final Records
The Design-Builder will submit final records (including all RFC documents) prior to Completion or termination of the contract. The WSDOT Engineer will Review and Comment on the submitted permanent final records and advice the Design-Builder of acceptance of permanent final records or will provide comments detailing issues to be resolved. If the Design-Builder choses to do permanent final records electronically once compete and assembled, they are sent to the WSDOT Engineer for review through the ECM. When one group completes their review, the records are locked to that group and are made available to the next. If a reviewer finds issues within the records, comments are added and the records are returned to the previous reviewer. Once all reviews are complete, HQ Record Services are notified by the WSDOT Engineer that the final records for the contract are complete. WSDOT Engineer will include all QV Inspector’s Daily Reports in Book 3 of final permanent records if not included by Design-Builder. The WSDOT Engineer will include all WSDOT Project Engineer diaries in Book2 of the final permanent records or provide diaries to Design-Builder to include in Book 2. Once WSDOT Engineer accepts and approves WSDOT Form 422-012 should be completed and affixed to each final record book when submitted with the files to WSDOT Engineering Records for filing. The address for Engineering Records may be found on the most current version of DOT Form 722-025. All final records sent to Engineering Records for filing will be kept permanently as the permanent final records for the completed project. Retention of paper permanent final records, are sent to WSDOT Engineering Records by the WSDOT Engineer and stored by State Records Center for 75 years. Retention of electronic permanent final records, are archived and stored electronically in ILink, for 75 years.
8-4.2.2
Temporary Final Records
The Design-Builder is required to collect and submit to the WSDOT Engineer temporary final records. Temporary final records consist of all construction records that are not retained as permanent final records. If temporary final records are kept in numbered books then, in order to eliminate confusion with permanent final records, these books are to be numbered consecutively beginning with Book Number 9. Refer to Figure 10-3 in the WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01 for example. Temporary Records submitted by the Design-Builder will consist of Nonconformance Reports (NCR)s, Nonconformance Issues (NCI)s, Material Certification (shown below), and the documents listed in Section 2.12.
Page 8-12
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Project Acceptance and Close Out
Chapter 8
Material Certification At the conclusion of the contract, the Design-Builder shall submit a final Materials Certification Checklist to the WSDOT Engineer. The materials certification is to be signed by the EOR, and the Construction Quality Assurance Manager (CQAM). The DesignBuilder may use the Contract Materials Checklist Form (DOT Form 350-115) or develop its own checklist with the same information as part of the Material Certification Package. The Materials Certification Package shall include all necessary supporting documentation. This documentation shall consist of all documentation practices used for material acceptance, and an explanation of any deficiencies noted in the checklist. The summary of this documentation shall be organized in an order similar to Division 9 of the Standard Specifications. 8-4.2.2.1
Acceptance and Retention of Temporary Final Records
All records designated as temporary final records, once reviewed and accepted by the WSDOT Engineer, will be retained by the WSDOT Engineer. The WSDOT Engineer should ensure that those records designated as temporary final records are also assembled as a portion of the overall project final records. All records designated as temporary final records, will be retained by the WSDOT Engineer for a period of 3 years after which they may be destroyed. If a claim, lawsuit, or other circumstance is found to be pending at the end of this 3-year period, the WSDOT Engineer should further retain those pertinent records until the issues have been resolved. The date for the beginning of this 3-year retention period for State-funded projects is the Acceptance Date; the date the State Construction Engineer signs the FCVC accepting the project. If Federal funds are involved in the project, the date for the beginning of this 3-year retention period is the date that FHWA accepts the final payment voucher. The Headquarters Accounting and Financial Services Division will send a Retention of Records on Federal Aid projects letter to the Region that specifically indicates the retention period. Note: Sources for this chapter were:
• Section 2.1, 2.12, 2.25 and 2.28 of the RFP Technical Requirements
• General Provisions of the RFP
• Close Out Training Module
• WSDOT Construction Manual M 41-01
• WSDOT Design Manual M 22-01
• Discussions with DB Work Group members
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Page 8-13
Chapter 8
Project Acceptance and Close Out
Page 8-14
Design-Build Manual M 3126.04 
Chapter 9
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
Vacant
Page 9-1
Chapter 9
Vacant
Page 9-2
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
Chapter 10
FHWA and Civil Rights
This chapter provides guidance for WSDOT personnel that are involved with Federallyfunded design-build projects. It is intended to be used with the Federally-funded version of the General Provisions RFP template. The Secretary of the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) has established a Secretary’s Executive Order E 1009.02 to affirm WSDOT’s commitment to promoting equity in contracting. This includes a priority to expand efforts to include Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE), and Federal Small Business Enterprise (FSBE) certified firm participation in Federal aid contracts and to afford those entities fair and equal opportunity to compete for WSDOT contracts. The Office of Equal Opportunity is tasked with increasing contracting opportunities for DBE businesses and to provide a welcome and responsive environment for contractors and consultants that support such efforts. The Office of Equal Opportunity is identifying and changing internal processes in order to achieve the agency’s overall goal for DBE and FSBE participation in contracting. Additionally, the Secretary’s Executive Order assists WSDOT and its sub-recipients with implementing and monitoring the DBE Program in a manner to achieve the intent of the program at both the project and program level. OEO continues to reorganize the management of the DBE and Civil Rights programs to determine best practices to develop, implement, monitor, and measure directives in order to deliver more successful DBE and FSBE programs. The reorganization process provides WSDOT the opportunity to increase small business participation via design-build and other alternative project delivery methods.
10-1
FHWA Involvement The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) was established in 1967 and is currently responsible for overseeing and administering a wide range of transportation programs, policies and regulations for both aviation and surface transportation. The top priorities at DOT are to keep the traveling public safe and secure, increase their mobility, and have our transportation system contribute to the nation’s economic growth. The DOT is comprised of multiple administrations. WSDOT interacts primarily with the following three operating administrations of the DOT: Federal Highway Administration The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) coordinates highway transportation programs in cooperation with states and other partners to enhance the country’s safety, economic vitality, quality of life, and the environment. Major program areas include the Federal-Aid Highway Program, which provides Federal financial assistance to the States to construct and improve the National Highway System, urban and rural roads, and bridges. This program provides funds for general improvements and development of safe highways and roads.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
Page 10-1
Chapter 10
FHWA and Civil Rights
The Federal Lands Highway Program provides access to and within national forests, national parks, Native American reservations and other public lands by preparing plans and contracts, supervising construction facilities, and conducting bridge inspections and surveys. The FHWA also manages a comprehensive research, development, and technology program. Federal Transit Administration The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) assists in developing improved mass transportation systems for cities and communities nationwide. Through its grant programs, FTA helps plan, build, and operate transit systems with convenience, cost and accessibility in mind. While buses and rail vehicles are the most common type of public transportation, other kinds include commuter ferryboats, trolleys, inclined railways, subways, and people movers. In providing financial, technical and planning assistance, the agency provides leadership and resources for safe and technologically advanced local transit systems while assisting in the development of local and regional traffic reduction. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is responsible for reducing deaths, injuries and economic losses resulting from motor vehicle crashes. NHTSA sets and enforces safety performance standards for motor vehicles and equipment, and through grants to state and local governments enables them to conduct effective local highway safety programs.
10-1.1
Stewardship and Oversight Agreement The Stewardship and Oversight (S&O) Agreement sets forth the agreement between the FHWA and the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) on the roles and responsibilities of FHWA and WSDOT with respect to project approvals, related responsibilities and oversight activities. The Construction Monitoring Plan is part of the S&O Agreement outlining additional reporting requirements on Federal projects. FHWA must review and approval certain operating procedures and guidance documents such as:
• WSDOT’s DBE Program Plan
• Construction Manual
• Standard Specs/GSPs
• Design Manual M 22-01 Design-build projects will follow the processes and procedures outlined in the S&O Agreement and as described in this manual. Listed below are the processes and procedures for involving the FHWA on design-build projects.
10-1.1.1
FHWA Approval of Design-Build Manual
The FHWA has approved the WSDOT Design-Build Manual M 3126 for use in Washington State. All WSDOT design-build projects will follow this manual. All future modifications to the Design-Build Manual will be made in accordance with the S&O Agreement. Page 10-2
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
FHWA and Civil Rights
10-1.2
Chapter 10
FHWA Authorization of Design-Build Projects The FHWA must authorize any design-build project involving Federal funds before the RFP can be issued. Federal authorization requires an accumulation of various planning and pre-design activities. This procedure outlines the steps and procedures for obtaining Federal authorization. 1. Unless otherwise authorized by the FHWA, the following is necessary prior to requesting Federal authorization: a. Completion and approval of the NEPA process* per Section 300.04 of the Design Manual M 22-01. b. The Conceptual Design Approval memorandum, channelization plans, and alignment plans c. All ROW is acquired* per Chapter 510 of the Design Manual M 22-01 and the Right of Way Manual M 26-01 d. ROW certifications per the Right of Way Manual M 26-01 e. Any Public Interest Funding (PIF) has been obtained f.
DBE/FSBE goals have been calculated using WSDOT’s FHWA-approved contract goal setting methodologies
g. Funding sources have been identified and funding groups have been finalized per the Program Management Manual h. Engineer’s Estimate is complete i.
State-furnished materials and proprietary materials have been tabulated per Section 700.01 of the Plans Preparation Manual
j.
Value Engineering has been completed, when applicable, as described in Chapter 310 of the Design Manual M 22-01
k. The Detailed Damage Inspection Report (DDIR) has been completed, when applicable l.
Agreement numbers have been obtained
m. The draft transportation management plan has been completed for Significant Projects as per Chapter 1010 of the Design Manual M 22-01 (the final TMP is completed by the design-build team. 2. FHWA approval is achieved per the requirements of Chapter 300 of the Design Manual M 22-01, Chapter 8 of the Program Management Manual, and the  FHWA/ WSDOT S&O Agreement. *See Chapter 11 of the WSDOT Design-Build Manual for potential exceptions.
10-1.2.1
Project Delivery Method Selection
WSDOT may invite the FHWA to Project Delivery Method Selection workshops for federally funded projects.
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
Page 10-3
Chapter 10
FHWA and Civil Rights
10-1.3
FHWA Concurrence of Design Analyses on NHS Highways WSDOT Design Manual Chapter 300 provides WSDOT design procedures, documentation and approvals necessary to deliver successful projects involving the Federal Highway Administration. All Design Analyses, whether initiated by WSDOT pre-award or by the Design-Builder post award, shall be developed and approved in accordance with Section 300.06(4) of the Design Manual M 22-01.
10-1.4
FHWA Projects of Division Interest (PoDIs) Projects of Division Interest (PoDI) are a set of projects for which FHWA determines the need to exercise oversight and approval authority. These are projects that have an elevated risk, contain elements of higher risk, or present a meaningful opportunity for FHWA involvement to enhance meeting program or project objectives. See Design Manual Section 300.05(1) for additional guidance on PoDI projects.
10-2
Civil Rights WSDOT’s Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) has several programs that require the incorporation of specific provisions within the RFPs of Federally-funded design-build projects. These programs include:
• Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE)
• Federal Small Business Enterprise (FSBE)
• On-the-Job Training (OJT)
• Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) These Federally-mandated programs (DBE, FSBE, OJT, and EEO) are utilized on all projects with Federal funding.
10-2.1
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Secretary’s Executive Order E 1009.02 directs WSDOT divisions and offices to increase contracting opportunities for DBE businesses and to provide a welcome and responsive environment for contractors and consultants that support such efforts.
10-2.1.1
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Goals
The DBE Goal is determined by OEO and is an assigned numerical percentage of the proposal price that may applied separately to the design portion and construction portion of the project. This is the minimum amount that the Proposer shall commit to by submission of the DBE Performance Plan including Good Faith Efforts. The DBE Goal will also be applied to change orders associated with this the contract. HQ OEO determines the DBE Goals for the project; a DBE Design Goal and a DBE Construction Goal.
Page 10-4
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
FHWA and Civil Rights
10-2.1.2
Chapter 10
DBE Performance Plan
The DBE Performance Plan is submitted with the Proposer’s proposal pursuant to the Instructions to Proposers and updated in accordance with Section 1-07.11(12) of the General Provisions. Region OEO as a technical advisor, reviews the DBE Performance Plan in accordance with Section 6-2.4 of this manual. After execution, the DBE Performance Plan is updated monthly. For more information refer to Section 1-07.11 (12) of the General Provisions.
10-2.2
Federal Small Business Enterprise (FSBE) The Federal Small Business Enterprise (FSBE) Program is a race and gender-neutral element of the Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) in accordance with the requirements of 49 CFR Part 26.39. WSDOT is committed to ensuring small businesses are afforded equal and fair opportunities to participate on WSDOT contracting, consulting, and procurement opportunities. The FSBE Program aims to structure contracting requirements to facilitate competition by small business concerns, take all reasonable steps to eliminate obstacles for small businesses to participate, and eliminate unnecessary and unjustified bundling of contract requirements.
10-2.2.1
Goals
WSDOT uses a similar goal setting methodology for FSBE goals that is used to set DBE Goals. Federally-funded WSDOT design-build projects may have FSBE goals established for both the design and construction portion of a project. Both FSBE goals can be established in addition to any DBE Goal requirements on a project. Design-Builders are expected to achieve the FSBE goal or demonstrate Good Faith Efforts to do so and FSBE firms are required to perform a Commercially Useful Function in order for participation to be credited toward the FSBE goals.
10-2.3
On-the-Job Training (OJT) Section 1-07.11(13) of the General Provisions is where you will outline your training requirements. There is only one fill-in in this section. It is for listing the required number of training hours. You will obtain this number from the HQ OEO office.
10-2.4
Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Section 1-07.11(10).2 of the General Provisions is where you will find Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP).
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
Page 10-5
Chapter 10
FHWA and Civil Rights
10-2.5
Apprenticeships
On-the-Job Training (OJT) – Federally Funded Contracts The amount of training hours are determined by HQ OEO. The requirements for trainee, training plan approval, and trainee payment are all specified in the contract. Refer to the Section 1-07.11(13), Special Training Provisions, of the General Provisions for training requirements. The contract allows the Design-Builder to accomplish required training hours as part of their work activities, or through the activities of their subcontractors or lower-tier subcontractors. However, the Design-Builder is designated as being solely responsible for the completion of the training requirements. Increases in training hours are allowable and may be approved on a case by case basis by the WSDOT Engineer in consultation with the Regional EEO Officer. On-the-Job-Training Required Reports DOT Form 272-049, Training Program This report shall be submitted to the WSDOT Engineer for approval prior to commencing contract work. For projects within Northwest Region, the DOT Form 272-049 Training Program reports are forwarded to the NW Region EEO Officer for approval before the work begins. The Project Office has the authority to approve Apprenticeship, Training, Employer and Labor Services (ATELS) or State Apprentice and Training Council (SATC) programs provided they meet the requirements specified in the contract. The Region EEO Officer will review any non-ATELS/SATC training plans submitted under Section III of the form for compliance and submit the plan to HQ OEO for concurrence and submittal to FHWA for final approval. DOT Form 272-050, Apprentice/Trainee Approval Request Approval of an individual trainee cannot be authorized until an approved Training Program is filed with the Region. This form shall be submitted by the Design-Builder for each trainee to be trained on the project. When an ATELS/SATC trainee is first enrolled, a copy of the trainee’s certificate showing training registration shall accompany the Trainee Approval Request. Trainees are approved by the Project Office based on the criteria in the Special Provisions. If the Design-Builder submits a request for approval of a trainee who is neither female, nor a minority, the Design-Builder shall submit a GFE and the Project Office will obtain concurrence from the Regional EEO Officer and OEO prior to approval. DOT Form 226-012, Trainee Interview Questionnaire One trainee interview is to be conducted for each craft designated on an approved training program for contracts which have 600 or more training hours or as designated by the Region EEO. The Region EEO shall designate additional contracts on which trainee interviews are to be completed in conjunction with those that meet the criteria above to ensure that trainee interviews are conducted on at least one fourth of all the contracts that have training hours established for any given construction season. The intent of these Page 10-6
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
FHWA and Civil Rights
Chapter 10
training interviews is to document that the trainees are working and receiving proper training consistent with their approved programs, that the trainee is being paid at the appropriate wage rate, and that discrimination/harassment is not occurring. Interviews are to be confidential and aside from the Design-Builder and subcontractors unless the Trainee states otherwise. The individual’s identity should not be disclosed to the employer without employee’s written permission. Submit completed interviews to the Region EEO Office. DOT Form 272-060, Federal-Aid Highway Construction Annual Project Training Report This report will be completed annually by the WSDOT Engineer summarizing the training accomplished by the individual trainees during the reporting period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the calendar year. This report is due at the Regional EEO Office by December 20th of the same calendar year, for submission to FHWA.
10-2.6
Requirements for Affirmative Action to Ensure Equal Employment Opportunity
EEO (State Funded Projects) The Design-Builder shall comply with the EEO requirements detailed in Section 1-07.11 of the General Provisions. The WSDOT Engineer should be alerted and respond to any indications or accusations of discrimination. If the WSDOT Engineer, or any other Project Office staff, becomes aware of any indications or accusations of discrimination, they will immediately notify the Region OEO Compliance Specialist, who will in turn immediately notify OEO. OEO will handle any investigation that is warranted. EEO (Federally Funded Projects) WSDOT has committed to FHWA to perform comprehensive construction compliance reviews, consistent with WSDOT’s approved EEO Assurances Program document, to ensure compliance with the Federal non-discrimination requirements (49 CFR Part 26) and FHWA 1273 as referenced in Section 1-07.11(10).2 of the General Provisions. This review is performed by OEO on a select number of FHWA funded contracts and may take place at any time, including after contract Completion. These reviews do not normally involve the Project Office other than notification of their occurrence and the resulting findings, however, OEO may elect to interview Project Office staff associated with the contract as part of their review. OEO will contact the Region OEO Compliance Specialist or Project Office to facilitate the timing of the review. Sanctions The WSDOT Engineer shall take steps to stop any acts that are harassing in nature as described in the Section 1-07.11(2) of the General Provisions. These steps may include removing a Design-Builder’s employee pending outcome of an investigation. ASCE approval is required in the case where the WSDOT Engineer determines that the conditions warrant removal of a Design-Builder’s employee. It is important to note that Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
Page 10-7
Chapter 10
FHWA and Civil Rights
this is not a request that the employee be terminated by the Design-Builder, just that they are removed from this project. The ASCE will consult with the Region OEO and investigate the conditions prior to directing the removal. Care should be taken to ensure that all parties are treated with respect and in a nondiscriminatory manner. The facts should be established and everyone should be given a chance be heard. Records and Reports FHWA-1391, Federal-Aid Highway Construction Contractors Annual EEO Report FHWA Form 1391 is required from both the Design-Builder and each subcontractor on Federally funded contracts that have construction activity during the month of July. These forms shall be submitted to the WSDOT Engineer, and are due by August 25th of each year. A Design-Builder who works on more than one Federally funded contract in July is required to file a separate report for each of those contracts. For multi-year projects, a report is required to be submitted each year work was performed for the duration of the contract. A responsible official of the company must sign the completed report. Upon receipt, the WSDOT Engineer will review, sign and date, and forward the annual report to the Region EEO Officer by September 5th. The Region EEO staff at the direction of the OEO will compile and report the information noted on the forms. FHWA-1392, Summary of Employment Data Report WSDOT is required to submit a summary of employment data to FHWA for each Federal fiscal year. This report is prepared using the data from FHWA-1391 (project specific annual reports) that have been submitted to the Region OEO Compliance Specialist by the Project Offices. The summary is prepared by the Region OEO Compliance Specialist or other Region designee for each Federally assisted project. The report also includes Local Agency Projects administered through the Region’s Highways and Local Programs Offices. The completed FHWA-1392 Report, including all FHWA-1391 reports, are then submitted by the Region EEO Officer to the WSDOT Office of Equal Opportunity by September 15th each year, for formal submission to FHWA. DOT Form 820-010, Monthly Employment Utilization Report The information required by DOT Form 820-010 may be accepted in an alternate format provided that format contains all of the data required by and is completed in accordance with the instructions for DOT Form 820-010. The Region EEO staff should be consulted regarding the acceptability of any alternate format proposed by the Design-Builder. Instructions for completing the form can be found on the back of the form itself. This monthly report is to be maintained by the Design-Builder in the Design-Builder’s or subcontractor’s records for a period of three years from Acceptance of the contract, and available to WSDOT and/or Federal reviewers upon request.
Page 10-8
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
FHWA and Civil Rights
Chapter 10
DOT Form 272-055, Final DBE Utilization Plan Report The Final DBE Utilization Plan Report is required on all contracts that include DBE requirements and must be accompanied by a report of the final amounts paid to DBEs, as verified from the final report generated through DMCS. The signed Final DBE Utilization Plan Report and the attached final amounts paid report become part of the three-year Temporary Final Records retained by the Region. The form may be signed by the WSDOT Engineer, Region Construction Engineer or the Region OEO Compliance Officer. The Final DBE Utilization Plan Report represents a certification that contracting records associated with DBE work have been reviewed, on-site performance has been monitored, and it has been determined that work committed to DBEs was performed by the designated DBEs. Signing this report also testifies that all DBE On-site Reviews are complete, on file, and can be retrieved as supporting documentation for the certification. This certification is a requirement of 49 CFR Part 26.37(b).
10-2.7
Title VI Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination based on race, color, and national origin in the provision of benefits and services. Additional nondiscrimination laws include the Federal-aid Highway Act of 1973, which added sex (gender) as a protected class; and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability. The Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987 clarified the broad institution-wide application of Title VI and other nondiscrimination statutes. The term “program or activity” means all of the operations of Federal-aid recipients, subrecipients, and contractors, whether such programs and activities are Federally funded or not. Title VI Discrimination Complaints Procedure The Title VI Discrimination Complaints Procedure is a mechanism to resolve grievances, remedy discrimination and improve program delivery and services. Any person/s who believes they have been subjected to unlawful discrimination (denied the benefits of, access to, or participation in the programs and activities of WSDOT) based on race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, income or Limited English Proficiency in programs, activities, or services of WSDOT or organizations funded through WSDOT may file a complaint. The complaint may be filed by the individual or his/her representative. A complaint must be filed no later than 180 days after the date of the alleged discrimination, unless extended by WSDOT. The complaint should be forwarded to WSDOT’s Office of Equal Opportunity for processing.
10-2.8
ADA American with Disabilities Act of 1990 guidance can be found in Chapter 15 of the Design Manual M 22-01
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 
Page 10-9
Chapter 10
FHWA and Civil Rights
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 10-10
Design-Build Manual M 3126.06 