use plans (see Design Manual Chapter 1102).
• An evaluation of the proposed project’s consistency with traffic requirements generated by planned land use. The discussion should include effects (both positive and negative) on safety, vehicles, transit, freight, bicycles, pedestrians, and parking.
• A discussion of how the project’s short-term impacts (both positive and negative) and use of resources contribute to the enhancement of the area’s long-term productivity. Compliance with FHWA’s Interim Guidance on the Application of Travel and Land Use Forecasting in NEPA is recommended, but not required for projects that use a travel demand model.
Farmland The Federal Farmland Protection Policy Act (FPPA) is intended to minimize the extent to which federal activities contribute to the conversion of farmland to nonagricultural uses. The FPPA requires agencies to examine the impact of their programs and projects before they approve any activity that would convert farmland to other uses. WSDOT complies with this requirement by completing the appropriate form in coordination with the NRCS. The NRCS recognizes three categories of farmland (see Section 455.10 Glossary for definitions) based on their soil types:
• Prime Farmland.
• Unique Farmland.
• Farmland of statewide or local importance.
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
The following are exempt from farmland analysis:
• Lands with soil types not suitable for crops (for example, sand dunes).
• Farmlands that have already been converted to industrial, commercial, residential, or recreational use.
• Farmlands already committed to urban development (for example, land within the adopted Urban Growth Area (UGA) and other urbanized areas. The definition in 7 CFR 658.2(a) includes specific information to better understand how urban development lands are determined that will help project teams decide whether a project is exempt from analysis. Because the rating is based on soil type, soils such as timber land, vacant land, and open space that has never been farmed may be designated as prime farmland. Therefore, for all non-exempt projects, the WSDOT project office should refer to the Land Use webpage for the documentation process and the NRCS farmlands webpage for FPPA procedural requirements. State law RCW 47.01.305 also directs WSDOT to use public lands for wetland mitigation sites before using land designated as agricultural land of long-term commercial significance (as defined in RCW 36.70A) for highway projects. If public lands are unavailable, WSDOT is directed to make every effort to avoid any net loss of agricultural lands. Notify the NEPA Specialist immediately if eminent domain is being considered. See more in Section 455.08 Mitigation.
Wild and Scenic Rivers The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (WSRA) designates certain rivers (or river segments) for special protection to preserve them in a free-flowing condition for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations. The act also identifies various “study rivers” for possible inclusion in the Wild and Scenic Rivers System. Currently, all of the designated Wild and Scenic Rivers in Washington State are administered by the United States Forest Service (USFS) in accordance with 36 CFR 297. See Chapter 457 for guidance on how the WSRA applies to Section 4(f) (of the Department of Transportation Act of 1966) resources. Closely examine the management plan and coordinate with the appropriate USFS office early in the environmental review and design process. Projects in a designated or study wild and scenic river that require a Section 404 permit from the Corps also require completion of a written Endangered Species Act (ESA) Section 7 determination by the USFS. Find more guidance on how to comply with the Wild & Scenic Rivers Act and NRI on our Land Use webpage. Federally designated Wild and Scenic Rivers within Washington include:
• Skagit River from the pipeline crossing at Sedro-Wooley upstream to and including the mouth of Bacon Creek and tributaries as listed below: – The Cascade River from its mouth to the junction of its North and South Forks. – The South Fork to the boundary of the Glacier Peak wilderness Area. – The Suiattle River from its mouth to the boundary of the Glacier Peak Wilderness Area at Milk Creek.
Land Use and Transportation
Chapter 455
– The Sauk River from its mouth to its junction with Elliot Creek. – The North Fork of the Sauk River from its junction with the South Fork of the Saul to the boundary of the Glacier Peak Wilderness Area.
• Klickitat River from Wheeler Creek to the confluence with the Columbia River, classified as a recreational river.
• White Salmon River from the confluence of Gilmer Creek (near the town of BZ Corner) to the confluence with Buck Creek; classified as a part wild and part scenic river. Federally designated Study Rivers within Washington State include:
• Skagit River from Mount Vernon to and including the mouth of Bacon Creek, plus additional segments of the Sauk, Suiattle, and Cascade tributaries.
• Klickitat River upstream of the confluence of the Little Klickitat River to the Yakama Indian Reservation boundary.
• Snake River from the town of Asotin to the Oregon state line.
• White Salmon River upstream of the confluence with Gilmer Creek. The President’s 1979 Environmental Message Directive on Wild and Scenic Rivers requires federal agencies to protect and manage rivers in the NRI that are suitable for inclusion in the Wild and Scenic Rivers System as part of their normal planning and environmental review process. The directive, a listing of NRI rivers in Washington State, and the procedure for consulting on projects that may affect these rivers is available on the NPS’s NRI website.
Section 6(f) of the Federal Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (LWCF) Projects that impact recreational lands require special consideration. Chapter 457 describes United States Department of Transportation (USDOT) specific requirements for considering impacts to recreation and resource lands (i.e., Section 4(f) properties). However, there are a number of federal and state grants given to recreation managers that require some type of compensation when lands are converted and can no longer be used for recreational purposes. The LWCF is a federal grant program which helps pay for the acquisition of outdoor recreation sites and facilities. Grants are awarded to cities, counties, Native American Tribes, state agencies, and park and school districts. In Washington State the Recreation and Conservation Office (RCO) oversees many grant programs including the LWCF and represents the interests of the NPS to ensure compliance with federal requirements. Section 6(f) of the LWCF prohibits the conversion of property acquired or developed with these grants to a non-recreational purpose without the approval of the NPS or their state designee. Therefore, a Section 6(f) analysis is also required if the project must use land purchased or improved using LWCF funding. If property purchased or improved through LWCF is impacted by a project, the property owner (grant sponsor) is responsible for compliance with all 6(f) requirements even if the impact is caused by another party, such as WSDOT. Therefore, conversion of a Section 6(f) property to transportation uses requires early coordination with RCO and the property owner (grant sponsor) to ensure:
• All practical alternatives to property conversion have been evaluated and no reasonable alternative exists to the conversion that would meet the project’s purpose and need.
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
• A mutually acceptable replacement property is found. The replacement property is reasonably equivalent in usefulness and location and fulfills the same recreational functions as the original property.
• The replacement property has an equal or greater fair market value than the original property.
• The public has been informed of the proposed conversion, been given a minimum of 30 days to comment on the change and their comments have been considered and adequately addressed by RCO/NPS.
• The replacement property is not designated recreation land owned by another public agency (i.e., you cannot replace a park with an existing park and thereby reduce the total amount of recreation land available to the community).
• A partial conversion will not adversely affect the recreational function of the remainder. If the remainder is not viable, the whole parcel must be replaced.
• NEPA, ESA, Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), and all other Federal approval requirements have been satisfactorily completed for the project as well as the conversion. Remember: the environmental approvals must include review of the portion of the recreation land to be converted and the proposed replacement site (LWCF State Assistance Program Manual Chapter 8 (E)(3)(g)). The Federal regulations stipulate that the environmental review be conducted in a neutral and factual manner and should not include statements that promote or justify the action precipitating the conversion. WSDOT project teams should coordinate with RCO as soon as the possibility of conversion is discovered to minimize project delay by ensuring:
• Agreement on the extent of impact caused by the project.
• The replacement property (if proposed) is determined acceptable by RCO prior to expenditure on appraisals or environmental review. If RCO discovers an unauthorized conversion, RCO must notify WSDOT of the violation. RCO’s notice will require that the project cease immediately until WSDOT satisfactorily completes the conversion process. WSDOT will also need to provide additional documentation to RCO. This documentation could include discussion of alternatives considered and a description of the work that required the use of a Section 6(f) property without prior notification and coordination with RCO. Standard procedures for working with RCO are described in their manual (RCO Manual 7 Section 3(6)). The Recreation and Conservation Funding Board (RCFB) must approve conversions of Section 6(f) properties. The conversion approval process can be very lengthy, so plan for this in the overall project schedule. RCO advises that any request for a conversion approval be pursued as soon as a potential conversion is identified. The complicated conversion process includes several administrative tasks before a proposal will be reviewed by the RCFB. Furthermore, the RCFB meets on a quarterly schedule, and the proposal must be received at least six weeks in advance of a decision by the RCFB. Further details regarding the approval process and document requirements should be sought from an RCO Grant Manager.
Land Use and Transportation
Chapter 455
Small conversions of less than 5 acres or 10 percent of the Section 6(f) property (whichever is smaller) may be accomplished under a less complex process. To qualify, the conversion must meet specific minimum size and cost requirements. WSDOT project teams must coordinate with RCO for small conversions. Size and cost requirement and the review process are described on RCO’s website in Manual 7 Section 3). Because properties purchased with LWCF are to be used for recreation, LWCF properties (Section 6(f) properties) qualify as Section 4(f) properties (see Chapter 457). Although all Section 6(f) properties are Section 4(f) properties, two different processes are needed to assess a project’s impacts to satisfy federal requirements. While Section 6(f) and Section 4(f) often apply to the same resources they are parts of different laws and there are some key differences:
• Section 6(f) applies only to properties acquired or improved with LWCF.
• Section 4(f) applies to all publicly owned parks, recreation areas and wildlife and waterfowl refuges regardless of the funding source.
• Section 6(f) applies to all programs and policies for all federal agencies. Section 4(f) only applies to USDOT programs and policies.
• Mitigation for impacts to Section 6(f) requires replacement with land of equal value, location, usefulness, and function as the impaired property. Mitigation for Section 4(f) impacts is much more flexible and may not require replacement. Comparison of Section 6(f) and Section 4(f) below summarizes the differences between Section 6(f) and Section 4(f). Exhibit 455-1
Comparison of Section 6(f) and Section 4(f)
Law
Section 6(f)
Section 4(f)
Legislative Reference
Land and Water Conservation Fund Act, Section 6(f).
Section 4(f) of DOT Act
Purpose
Preserve, develop, and assure the quality and quantity of outdoor parks and recreation areas and refuges for present and future generations.
Avoid use of public parks, waterfowl and wildlife refuges, and significant historic sites.
Application
Applies to programs and policies of any federal agency and can apply to fully state funded projects where no federal nexus exists. When projects impact recreational lands purchased or improved with Land and Water Conservation Funds.
Applies only to programs and policies undertaken by USDOT agencies. When projects impact significant public parks, recreation areas, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and significant historic sites are “used” for a highway project regardless of funding source.
Mitigation
Requires that impacted resourced be replaced with lands of equal value, location, and usefulness.
Allows flexible mitigation opportunities.
Final Approval
NPS through RCO.
USDOT Agency lead.
Relationship to Each Other
Section 4(f) is not an integral part of the Section 6(f) process.
Section 6(f) may influence the decision making during the consideration of minimization of harm during the Section 4(f) evaluation process, but they are independent processes.
For more information about Section 4(f) evaluations see Chapter 457. 
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
Documentation and procedural requirements for complying with NEPA differ between federal lead agencies. Conversion of a 6(f) property cannot be accomplished until we have satisfied all the NEPA, ESA, and Section 106 requirements for both the property proposed to be converted and the proposed replacement property. The exact requirements will vary depending on individual circumstances and the other federal agencies involved. Early coordination with RCO, NPS, and any land-owning agencies involved is recommended to ensure that our process meets their requirements and eliminate rework. The RCO also manages many other state and federal grant programs, aside from the Land and Water Conservation Fund Program. These grants fund public recreation sites and facilities (such as parks, trails, trailheads, boat launches, habitat areas and gun ranges), and habitat improvements. RCO awards grants to counties, cities, nonprofit organizations, lead entities, state and federal agencies and Native American tribes. Decisions on granting and conversion of lands that have received grants occur through one of two funding boards: the Recreation and Conservation Funding Board and the Salmon Recovery Funding Board.It is important to research potentially impacted trails, parks, habitat areas, etc. to determine if RCO grant funds have been used to purchase and/or support the site. Impacts to these funded sites are handled in a similar manner to what is described in the section above concerning 6(f). Early coordination with RCO and the land owner (grant sponsor) is important to ensure all compliance and conversion policies are followed as outlined in the signed project agreement form, as found in RCO Manual 7 Section 3.
Resource Conservation Areas Resource Conservation Areas have previously been called Beautification Areas, Landscape Areas, Landscape or Conservation Easements, or Environmental Commitment Areas on Right of Way Plans and Real Estate Services Maps. They are natural areas, outside of limited access areas, that were purchased or set aside to provide a natural, vegetated buffer between the highway and adjacent land uses. It is FHWA and WSDOT policy that impacts these areas must be avoided - see 2016 FHWA letter regarding impacts to Resource Conservation Areas. However, due to the constrained, linear character of highway facilities, project impacts may be unavoidable. If impacts are unavoidable, they must be minimized and mitigated. See the Roadside Policy Manual M 3110 for more information.
Transit The state’s multimodal system supports local and regional transit operators. Buses and vanpools use state highways, park and rides, and other WSDOT managed assets. WSDOT projects have the potential to benefit and impact transit operations by changing traffic flow and travel patterns. Highway, ferry, and rail construction projects may affect travel time, relocate or remove transit stops, or change pedestrian access to transit stops by adding median barriers or relocating cross walks. Consult with the WSDOT Regional Transit Coordination Division in the Central Puget Sound area and with the WSDOT Public Transportation Division elsewhere in the state to locate the transit agencies most likely to be affected by your proposed project. Early and continuous coordination with local and transit agencies should be undertaken to maximize the potential benefits to transit operations of the proposed project and mitigate any negative construction or operational impacts.
Land Use and Transportation
Chapter 455
The environmental review should include potential impacts to the transit system. Areas of concern include the effect on existing transit operations (area and frequency of service, travel time, and patronage), access to transit by people walking and bicycling, changes in traffic distribution, local circulation patterns, and parking. Impacts include temporary (detours, temporary route closures, etc.) and long-term. For more information on assessing environmental impacts related to transit, refer to the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) Transportation Impacts webpage.
Waterborne Navigation and Ferry Facilities Ferry Terminals are typically located in navigable waters within the corporate limits of cities where harbor lines have been established by the state Harbor Lines Commission. According to the State Constitution (Article XV Harbors and Tide Waters), harbor areas are “forever reserved for landings, wharves, streets, and other conveniences of navigation and commerce.” The DNR manages the use of harbor areas in accordance with the Aquatic Lands Act (RCW 79.105). These areas are also subject to local land use regulations, including shoreline, critical area, and zoning regulations. U.S. Homeland Security regulations (33 CFR 165) impose security zones at ferry terminals and around vessels. A 25-yard separation zone is required when vessels are at the dock, and a 100-yard separation zone is required when the vessel is in route. Potential impacts to these security zones should be addressed in the land use analysis. Ferry Terminal projects often receive FTA funds, and/or the facilities may have received FTA funding. Washington State Ferries (WSF) projects may also be subject to FTA requirements. FTA procedures are described on their website. The process for complying with the NEPA and federal surface transportation statutes is defined in the joint Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)/Federal Railroad Administration (FRA)/FTA Environmental Impact and Related Procedures (23 CFR 771). Road projects typically have little impact on waterborne navigation. However, river crossings may affect shipping routes or access to port facilities. Section (V)(G)(11) of FHWA Technical Advisory TA 6640.8A requires an analysis of potential impacts to waterborne navigation and a discussion of mitigation for adverse impacts. Any project that requires a Section 9 (of the Rivers and Harbors Act) permit must also show evidence of coordination with the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) in accordance with the FHWA/USCG Memorandum of Agreement (MOA). Early coordination is required during the project planning phase, prior to formal project initiation (see the table in Section V for specific requirements). Where the preferred alternative requires a Section 9 permit, the NEPA documentation should include an exhibit showing the horizontal and vertical navigational clearances for each permit activity. Highway projects adjacent to ferry terminals may affect ferry loading and unloading procedures, transit access, or parking. Coordination with WSF terminal operations staff and a discussion of the affects (both beneficial and adverse) to ferry operations should be included in the environmental document. Signal timing, turning movements, access to parking, transit stops, pedestrian flow and bicycle connections may be important factors. The environmental document must evaluate the effect of proposed ferry operations on the adjacent street system for vehicular traffic, transit access, pedestrian flow, and bicycle access.
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
Rail Facilities There are over 3,000 miles of railroad lines in Washington, providing mobility for freight and passengers moving into, out of, within, and through the state. Two Class I railroads, the BNSF Railway and the Union Pacific Railroad, as well as 23 short-line railroads, operate through communities in Washington. The Palouse River and Coulee City (PCC) rail system, owned and operated by WSDOT, is the longest short-line freight rail system in Washington. WSDOT contracts with private railroads to operate each of the branches. In addition, Sound Transit owns and operates some rail lines, such as the Point Defiance Bypass route in Tacoma, and commuter light rail. WSDOT works with a diverse group of federal agencies depending on who owns or regulates the rail line, including the FHWA, FRA, FTA, and Surface Transportation Board (STB). FHWA is typically the lead when a multimodal transportation project includes work on, over, or adjacent to rail facilities. Types of projects include grade crossing improvements, nearby roadway intersection improvements, and infrastructure improvements to support passenger rail service. When FHWA is the sole lead federal agency, apply the Design Manual Chapter 1350 policies and procedures for coordinating highway and rail projects. It also includes requirements for conducting a safety analysis for at-grade crossings and signalized intersections in the vicinity of rail crossings. If FRA is the federal lead, the EA/EIS must assess the direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts on both passenger and freight transportation, by all modes, including bicycles and pedestrians. The analysis should address local, regional, national, and international perspectives and include a discussion of construction and long-term impacts on vehicular traffic congestion. When FRA is the federal lead, refer to their agency-specific information on assessing environmental impacts on the FRA & NEPA website. As of November 28, 2018, FRA conducts environmental reviews according to its revised NEPA legislation and regulations contained in 23 CFR Part 771, Environmental Impact and Related Procedures, and 23 CFR Part 774, Parks, Recreation Areas, Wildlife and Waterfowl Refuges, and Historic Sites (Section 4(f)) for transportation projects. The STB is an economic-regulatory agency and has jurisdiction over rail related proposals that include construction of new rail lines and connecting track, rail line abandonments, as well as discontinuing rail service. These types of projects are generally proposed by freight railroads and do not typically involve WSDOT. STB’s environmental rules can be found at 49 CFR 1105. The environmental rules implement various environmental statutes that include NEPA, the NHPA, ESA, and the Coastal Zone Management Act.
Aviation Facilities WSDOT manages and operates 16 airports. These serve the general public and play key roles in emergency response, search and rescue, and fire suppression. Capital projects to improve these airports may be subject to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) rules as well as SEPA. FAA retains jurisdiction, but WSDOT Aviation is required by law to review all development permits and ordinances and then comment on whether there are potential impacts to the airspace based on the submitted information.
Land Use and Transportation
Chapter 455
Any proposed highway construction or alteration in the vicinity of a public or military airport will require early coordination with WSDOT’s Aviation Division. WSDOT Aviation is required to review projects within the areas of these projects and then make a determination of their potential impacts to the airport. Projects located within 3.8 miles of an airport may require an obstruction evaluation and must comply with FAA regulations to ensure that airway highway clearances are adequate for the safe movement of air and highway traffic (23 USC 318 and 23 CFR 620 Subpart A, Highway Improvements in the Vicinity of Airports). The guidance addresses:
• The effect of airports on adjacent land use and appropriate environmental documentation of proposed airport actions.
• The kinds of information on existing and planned land use that should be provided in an environmental document for highway projects within 3.8 miles of an airport, including “significance thresholds” for various land use related topics. Aviation also has an Airport Mapping Application that can help determine if the project could potentially impact the airspace. A WSDOT Airports and Compatible Land Use Guidebook is also available by contacting a WSDOT Aviation Planner. Review of the Airport Stormwater Design Manual M 3041 is recommended to evaluate potential impacts from the construction and operation of stormwater detention facilities in close proximity to airports. If the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is the lead federal agency, the environmental document must evaluate the effect of airport expansion or rehabilitation projects on the local transportation network, including effect on parking, transit, vehicle congestion, travel time, and traffic patterns. FAA guidance on how land use compatibility should be addressed in airport planning and NEPA documents is found in FAA Orders 1050.1E and 5050.4B. Contact the WSDOT Aviation Division for assistance.
Bicycling and Pedestrian Facilities The state’s 2022 Move Ahead Washington transportation package contains significant investments in transit and active transportation – including projects to improve safety for bicyclists and pedestrians. WSDOT projects often include these elements. The Active Transportation Plan 2020 and Beyond (PDF 19.1MB), is a compass for creating the future of walking, biking and rolling on or across state highways in Washington. It is used in decisions to help connect people to where they want to go, whether they use active transportation for the whole trip or just a part of it, such as the walk to a bus stop, the bike ride to work or rolling home from a ferry terminal. The FHWA Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy is to incorporate safe and convenient walking and bicycling facilities into transportation projects and to go beyond minimum standards to provide safe and convenient facilities for these modes. Bicycle and pedestrian facility projects should be defined as standalone projects and not be inappropriately segmented from larger highway projects in order to simplify their environmental review. Projects must consider impacts of construction of pedestrian access routes and bicycle and pedestrian lanes, paths, and facilities in order to verify the appropriate use of the FHWA CE (23 CFR 771.117(c)(3)). This CE applies regardless of needing right of way or total project cost. 
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
Section 7 of FHWA’s Technical Advisory T 6640.8A states that the environmental document should discuss current and anticipated use of the bicycle and pedestrian facility, potential impacts, and measures to avoid or reduce adverse impacts. This applies to formal trails and informal pathways with identified use by bicyclists and pedestrians. If the preferred alternative would sever an existing major route for non-motorized transportation traffic, the proposed project needs to provide a reasonable alternative route or demonstrate that such a route exists (23 USC 109(m)). When new bicycle and pedestrian facilities are proposed as part of a highway project, the environmental document should:
• Include sufficient information to explain the basis for providing the facilities (e.g., proposed bicycle facility is a link in the local plan, or sidewalks will reduce project access impact to the community).
• Identify the facilities to be included in the preferred alternative.
455.04(3)
Analysis and documentation for SEPA only (no federal nexus)
For projects with no federal nexus, WSDOT project teams should still follow the analysis and documentation requirements in Section 455.04(2). Exceptions include the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act and the FPPA, which only apply to federal activities.
455.04(4)
Other Considerations
This section describes other considerations that should be included during environmental review.
Scenic River System Act RCW 79A.55 established a scenic river system in Washington State. The system is managed by the State Parks and Recreation Commission to “protect and preserve the natural character of rivers with outstanding natural, scenic, historic, ecological, and recreational values”. The protected lands include river and publicly owned or leased lands up to one quarter mile on each side of the river. The State Parks Commission has developed and adopted management policies for the public lands along designated rivers. RCW 79A.55.040 requires that the management policies be integrated into local Shoreline Management Master Plans. State designated Scenic Rivers include: 1. The Skykomish River from the junction of the north and south forks of the Skykomish (within the jurisdiction of Snohomish County): a. Downstream approximately fourteen miles to the junction of the Sultan River. b. Upstream approximately twenty miles on the south fork to the junction of the Tye and Foss rivers (within the jurisdiction of King County). c. Upstream approximately eleven miles on the north fork to its junction with Bear Creek (within the jurisdiction of Snohomish County).
Land Use and Transportation
Chapter 455
2. The Beckler River from its junction with the south fork of the Skykomish River upstream approximately eight miles to its junction with Rapid River (within the jurisdiction of King County). 3. The Tye River from its junction with the south fork of the Skykomish River approximately fourteen miles to Tye Lake (within the jurisdiction of King County). 4. The Little Spokane River from the upstream boundary of the state park boat put in site near Rutter Parkway and downstream to its confluence with the Spokane River (within the jurisdiction of Spokane County).
Shoreline Management Act The Shoreline Management Act (SMA) aims to “prevent the inherent harm in an uncoordinated and piecemeal development of the state’s shorelines” (RCW 90.58). SMA also recognizes that “shorelines are among the most valuable and fragile” of the state’s resources. The SMA provides for the management and protection of the state’s shoreline resources by requiring planning for their reasonable and appropriate use. The area regulated under the Act includes lands within two hundred (200) feet of designated shorelines as well as certain wetlands, river deltas, floodways and floodplains associated with such shorelines. The SMA establishes a balance of authority between local and state governments. Cities and counties have the primary review responsibility for development along their shorelines, and the state (through the Washington State Department of Ecology) has authority to review local master programs and local shoreline development permit decisions. Shorelines of the state include:
• All marine waters;
• Streams with greater than twenty cubic feet per second (20 cfs) mean annual flow;
• Lakes twenty (20) acres or larger; Upland areas called shorelands that extend two hundred (200) feet landward, in all directions on a horizontal plane, from the edge of the ordinary high watermark (OHWM) of these waters; and
• The following areas when they are associated with one of the above: – Wetlands and river deltas; and – Floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward two hundred (200) feet from such floodways.
National Trails System Act The National Trails System Act 1968 (16 USC 1241-1251) requires federal agencies that abandon roadways, utility right of way, or other properties suitable for improving or expanding the national trails system to consider the possibility of using the abandoned right of way to extend the national trail system.
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
Safe Routes to Schools WSDOT oversees the Safe Routes to Schools grant program. This provides funds for pedestrian and bicyclist safety infrastructure improvements within two miles of a school (typically, also includes preliminary engineering, and right of way). Local agencies, Tribes and schools identify biking and walking routes. Areas that include state routes have typically undergone some evaluation by the WSDOT region as well. WSDOT’s Active Transportation Division can provide project teams with information on how to coordinate proposed projects near schools. Efforts to avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse impacts and coordinate with school officials should be discussed in the environmental document.
Parking If a project provides, removes, or relocates parking, the local jurisdiction’s zoning, road standards, and off-street parking regulations may apply. Links to appropriate city and county regulations can be found by searching the Municipal Research and Services Center (MRSC) website.
455.05 External engagement The conversion of a 6(f) property to transportation uses requires that the public has been informed of the proposed conversion, been given a minimum of 30 days to comment on the change, and their comments have been considered and adequately addressed by the RCO and NPS.
455.06 Internal roles and responsibilities The following represent typical roles and responsibilities for key offices. Actual roles and responsibilities may vary within the regions and modes.
455.06(1)
Planner
Conduct environmental screening for potential land use impacts. Notifies the NEPA Specialist and region environmental if land use impacts are anticipated. Review GMA comprehensive plans and other local, regional, state, and tribal land use plans for consistency with the plan’s recommendations. Coordinate the annual process to review and approve the conformity determination in Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) Transportation Improvement plans (TIP), See Chapter 425.
455.06(2)
Project engineer
Oversee all engineering studies and technical reports are prepared as needed and provide appropriate levels of analysis to support the environmental review process and permitting activities to the environmental staff. Coordinate with Region Environmental to discuss potential environmental impacts of the project. Ensure that the Practical Design process is documented in the project in sufficient detail to support the administrative record and environmental documentation. The Design Manual Chapter 1100 describes Practical Design.
Land Use and Transportation
455.06(3)
Chapter 455
Region environmental
Oversee the development of environmental review documents. Research and provide information describing the environmental context for the project commensurate with the level of design detail provided and the potential environmental impacts of the project. Right-size the research and analysis using GIS data, windshield surveys, coordination with subject matter experts, or site-specific analysis as appropriate. Communicate environmental information to the environmental and engineering teams so that potential budget, schedule, and permitting issues are clearly understood, taken into consideration throughout the process, and incorporated as needed for permits and other agency approvals.
455.06(4)
Environmental services office
The primary role of the Environmental Services Office (ESO) is to keep the guidance current with evolving and changing rules and regulations. ESO staff also provide expert assistance for developing scopes of work for consultants and internal WSDOT staff as well as reviewing environmental documents. The ESO NEPA Specialist is available to consult on projects requiring Land Use and Transportation analyses. For EAs and EISs, the NEPA Specialist also reviews Land Use and Transportation analyses for procedural accuracy, substantive adequacy, and legal sufficiency.
455.07 Applicable permits and approvals Clean Water Act Projects in a “designated” or “study” wild and scenic river area may require a Section 404 permit from the Corps for compliance with the Clean Water Act, and an ESA Section 7 determination by the USFS.
Navigable waters Projects that impact waterborne navigation require a Section 9 Bridge Permit from the USCG. Any project that requires a Section 9 Bridge Permit must also show evidence of coordination with the USCG in accordance with the FHWA/USCG MOA. Projects that include plans for a bridge or structure over or involving waters of the US where the navigable portions of rivers or other waterways involved in the project are not within a single state may require a Section 9 (of the Rivers and Harbors Act) permit.
Section 6(f) of the Federal Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (LWCF) The conversion of a Section 6(f) property to a transportation use also requires approval by the RCFB.
Forest Practices The DNR requires a forest practices permit for certain work on private or state forest lands (RCW 76.09; WAC 222). Project activities that trigger permits include: converting timberland to other uses, harvesting timber, and installing/replacing water crossings on forest roads.
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
Aquatic Use Authorization The DNR requires an Aquatic Use Authorization permit if work is performed on state-owned aquatic lands. Coordinate with your WSDOT Real Estate Services office to work with DNR to determine if your project is on state-owned aquatic lands (RCW 79.105; WAC 332.30). If an Aquatic Use Authorization is needed, WSDOT Real Estate Services typically submits the permit to DNR.
Critical Areas Permits The GMA directs locals agencies to develop comprehensive plans and ordinances that protect locally delineated wetlands, wellhead protection areas, frequently flooded areas, geographically hazardous areas, fish and wildlife habitat, and other conservation areas (RCW 36.70A; RCW 36.70B; WAC 365-190; WAC 365-195; WAC 365-196). Local governments typically require a Critical Areas permit if work is performed within areas designated by their critical areas ordinance.
Property acquisition Local permits and approvals, for example building and demolition permits, may apply. For more information on the permitting process, see Chapter 500.
455.08 Mitigation The environmental documentation should describe any recommended mitigation measures and commitments to stakeholders for the design, construction, and post-construction phases. The documentation should also describe whether additional mitigation measures were considered and why these were not included. RCW 47.01.305 requires that WSDOT considers agricultural lands of long-term commercial significance, as defined in RCW 34.70A.030, when reviewing and selecting sites to meet environmental mitigation requirements under NEPA. It also requires WSDOT to consider using public lands first before using land defined as agricultural land of long-term commercial significance, as defined in RCW 36.70A. If public lands are not available that meet the required environmental mitigation needs, then WSDOT may use other sites while making every effort to avoid any net loss of agricultural lands that have a designation of long-term commercial significance. Mitigation for impacts to Section 6(f) properties requires replacement with land of equal value, location, usefulness, and function as the impaired property. See Section 455.04(2). Refer to Section 2.2(7) of the Roadside Policy Manual for mitigation of unavoidable impacts to Resource Conservation Areas. The NPS NRI website provides guidance on how to avoid, minimize, and mitigate adverse effects on NRI rivers. Chapter 490 provides guidance on how to incorporate environmental commitments into project contracts. This is important for NEPA/SEPA commitments as well as regulatory permit commitments.
Land Use and Transportation
Chapter 455
455.09 Abbreviations and acronyms 4(f)
Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act of 1966
6(f)
Section 6(f) of the Federal Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (LWCF)
CE
Categorical Exclusion (NEPA); Categorical Exemption (SEPA)
CEQ
Council for Environmental Quality
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations
Corps
United States Army Corps of Engineers
EA
Environmental Assessment (NEPA/SEPA)
EIS
Environmental Impact Statement (NEPA/SEPA)
ERS/ECS
Environmental Review Summary / Environmental Classification Summary
ESA
Endangered Species Act
ESO
Environmental Services Office
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
FCIR
Farmland Conversion Impact Rating form
FHWA
Federal Highway Administration
FPPA
Farmland Protection Policy Act
FRA
Federal Railroad Administration
FTA
Federal Transit Administration
GMA
Growth Management Act
LOS
Level of Service
LWCF
Land and Water Conservation Fund Act
MOA
Memorandum of Agreement
MRSC
Municipal Research and Services Center of Washington
NEPA
National Environmental Policy Act
NRCS
Natural Resources Conservation Service
NRI
Nationwide Rivers Inventory
NPS
National Park Service
RCO
Washington State Recreation and Conservation Office
RCW
Revised Code of Washington
RCFB
Recreation and Conservation Funding Board
SEPA
State Environmental Policy Act
STB
Surface Transportation Board
USC
United States Code
USCG
United States Coast Guard
USDOT
United States Department of Transportation
USFS
United States Forest Service
WAC
Washington Administrative Code
WSF
Washington State Ferries
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
455.10 Glossary These definitions provide context for the Land Use analysis. Some terms may have other meanings in a different context. Essential Public Facilities – As defined under GMA, essential public facilities that are typically difficult to site, including airports, state or regional transportation facilities, and services of statewide significance as defined in RCW 47.06.140 (including improvements to such facilities and services identified in the statewide multimodal plan) and other public facilities that are typically difficult to site. Farmland of Statewide or Local Importance – FPPA defines farmland of statewide or local importance as land used for the production of food, feed, fiber, forage, or oilseed crops, as determined by the state or local government agency or agencies, using U.S. Department of Agriculture guidelines. Federal Nexus – A determination that at least one federal agency is involved as a proponent of a specified proposal and/or as an agency that needs to act on a federal permit, license, or other entitlement (such as a request to use federal funds or federal land) needed to implement the proposal. A federal nexus (even on an otherwise non-federal proposal) typically triggers the need for the federal agency or agencies to comply with various federal statutes include, but not limited to, NEPA, Section 106, Section 4(f), Section 6(f), and ESA Section 7. Indirect Effects – The indirect land use effects involve potential development, or redevelopment of buildable lands within the influence of the transportation project. These changes are driven and constrained by social and economic factors beyond WSDOT or the local public agency’s control. Such effects are difficult to predict and often controversial. Projects that do not increase capacity, change the level of service (LOS), or significantly reduce travel time are unlikely to change land use. Level of Service (LOS) – LOS describes the minimum amount of a public facility which must be provided to meet the community’s basic needs and expectations. Please consult with Multimodal Planning and Data Division and Traffic Operations for current best practices. Prime Farmland – As defined in the FPPA, Prime Farmland is land that has the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, fiber, forage, oilseed, and other agricultural crops with minimum inputs of fuel, fertilizer, pesticides, and labor, and without intolerable soil erosion. Prime farmland includes land that possesses the above characteristics and may include land currently used as cropland, pastureland, rangeland, or forestland. It does not include land already in or committed to urban development or water storage. Resource Conservation Areas – Previously called Beautification Areas, Landscape Areas, Landscape or Conservation Easements, or Environmental Commitment Areas on Right of Way Plans and Real Estate Services Maps, these are natural areas outside of the limited access hachures that were purchased or set aside to provide a natural, vegetated buffer between the highway and adjacent land uses.
Land Use and Transportation
Chapter 455
Section 6(f) Property – Any property acquired or developed with financial assistance under Section 6(f) of the federal LWCF Act. See Section 455.04(2). Transportation Facilities and Services of Statewide Significance – Defined in RCW 47.06.140 to include the interstate highway system, interregional state principal arterials including ferry connections that serve statewide travel, intercity passenger rail services, intercity high-speed ground transportation, major passenger intermodal terminals excluding all airport facilitates and services, the freight railroad system, the Columbia/Snake navigable river system, marine port facilities, and services that are related solely to marine activities affecting international and interstate trade, and high capacity transportation systems serving regions as defined in RCW 81.104.015. Unique Farmland – As defined in the FPPA, Unique Farmland is land other than prime farmland that is used for production of specific high value food and fiber crops. It has the special combination of soil quality, location, growing season, and moisture supply needed to economically produce sustained high quality or high yields of specific crops when treated and managed according to acceptable farming methods. Examples of such crops include lentils, nuts, annually cropped white wheat, cranberries, fruits, and vegetables. Urban Growth Area (UGA) – UGAs are those areas designated by a county pursuant to the GMA, which are planned to support urban development and densities within the next 20 years. Growth within UGAs is intended to be urban, and growth outside of UGAs can only occur if it is not urban in nature. These rules are to concentrate growth and reduce urban sprawl into natural areas and landscapes.
Chapter 455
Land Use and Transportation
This page intentionally left blank.
Chapter 456 456.01 456.02 456.03 456.04 456.05 456.06 456.07 456.08 456.09 456.10 456.11
Cultural resources
Introduction Applicable statutes, regulations, & executive orders Cultural resources considerations during project development Analysis & documentation requirements External engagement Internal Roles and responsibilities Mitigation Applicable permits & approval process Abbreviations and acronyms Glossary Exhibit
456.01 Introduction It is WSDOT policy to avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse impacts to cultural resources in planning, constructing, operating, or maintaining the state’s transportation system. The term cultural resources refers to sites, buildings, structures, districts, and objects fifty-years of age or older. Archaeological sites include precontact and historic-era surfaces, buried or underwater features, and artifacts. Historic properties consist of buildings and structures such as buildings, roads, bridges, railways, vessels, canals, ditches, geological features, and other features of the landscape. Transportation projects and maintenance activities sponsored or performed by WSDOT Regions and Modes have potential to impact cultural resources. These actions are subject to compliance with state and federal regulations that govern the treatment of archaeological, historical, and cultural resources.
456.02 Applicable statutes, regulations, & executive orders 456.02(1)
Federal
• Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, and its implementing regulations 36 CFR 800
• Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act 49 USC 303
• Historic Bridge Program 12 U.S.C 144(g)
• National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) 42 US 4321
• Archaeological Resources Protection Act 43 CFR 7.6-7.11
• Curation of Federally Owned and Administered Archaeological Collections 36 CFR 79
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
456.02(2)
State
• Centennial Accord
• Governor’s Executive Order 21-02 Archeological and Cultural Resources
• State Environmental Policy Act WAC 197-11 and WAC 468-12
• Abandoned and Historic Cemeteries Act RCW 68.60
• Indian Graves and Records Act RCW 27.44
• Archaeological Sites and Resources Protection Act RCW 27.53
• Archaeology and Historic Preservation RCW 27.34.200
456.02(3)
Local
Some local jurisdictions have local landmark or cultural resources ordinances
456.03 Cultural resources considerations during project development 456.03(1)
Planning
Chapter 200 explains how planning projects (any pre-NEPA plan) can consider environmental issues. Project teams should check to see if a planning study has been done in their project area, and if so, refer to any cultural resources documented in that study. Cultural resources compliance begins with notifying the Region, Division, or Mode WSDOT Cultural Resources Specialist (CRS) of the proposed activity. This notification must include the project location, scope and extent of planned work, and funding sources and required permits.
456.03(2)
Scoping
Consideration of project impacts to cultural resources (i.e., archaeological sites, buildings, historic highway bridges, or cultural places) early in the planning process will help identify potential scope and scheduling impacts. Coordinate with the Region, Division, or Mode CRS to identify the appropriate regulatory environment and compliance process for the proposed activity. State (Governor’s Executive Order 21-02) and federal (Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act 36 CFR 800) regulations follow similar steps in the compliance process: (1) define the project’s Area of Potential Effect (APE), (2) initiate consultation with interested and affected parties, (3) identify cultural resources in the project area, and determine project impacts, and (4) work with consulting parties to avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse impacts to cultural resources. Mitigation to resolve adverse effects is achieved through consultation and formalized in an agreement. All these steps are done by or under the direct supervision of the Region, Division, or Mode Cultural Resources Specialist in coordination with the Project Engineer and Environmental Manager.
Cultural resources
456.03(3)
Chapter 456
Design
The Region, Division, or Mode CRS will work with the project office to define the project area, identify consulting parties, and initiate consultation under GEO 21-02 or Section 106 (36CFR800). The majority of WSDOT projects are subject to review under Section 106, and primarily follow the alternative compliance process illustrated in Exhibit 400-1 and defined in the Statewide Programmatic Agreement (PA) with the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP), Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), and Federal Transit Administration (FTA). A CRS will exempt certain activities presumed to have minimal or no potential to effect cultural resources from Section 106 review per Stipulation VII and Appendix B of the Statewide PA.
456.03(4)
Construction
Consult the Region, Division, or Mode CRS to develop a project specific Inadvertent Discovery Plan (IDP) for the unanticipated discovery of cultural resources or human skeletal remains during construction. An IDP is required for all projects as stipulated in sections 1-07.16(4) Archaeological and Historical Objects and 1-07.16(4) Inadvertent Discovery of Human Skeletal Remains of the Standards Specifications manual. The IDP must be kept on site and provides guidance for the treatment of cultural resources if encountered during project activities. The IDP must be provided to the construction inspectors, the Project Engineer, and the construction contractor Project Manager and Foreman. Archaeological monitoring may be required if results of the cultural resources survey indicate resources are likely to be encountered in the project area during construction (see General Special Provisions 071604.GR1 - Construction Procedures for Discovery of Archaeological and Historic Objects).
456.03(5)
Maintenance and Operations
Notify the Region CRS of highway maintenance activities that include ground disturbing activities. The WSDOT Maintenance Program Cultural Resources Checklist provides a mechanism to review ground disturbing maintenance work for potential impacts to cultural resources. In the case of maintenance activities that occur on tribal reservations, or federal lands, WSDOT must comply with provisions of Maintenance agreements with the affected tribes or federal land-owning agencies (USFS, NPS, BLM, BIA, USFWS, etc.). Certain maintenance activities may also be subject to review under GEO 21-02.
456.04 Analysis & documentation requirements Section 106 is a separate regulatory process from NEPA, however, Section 106 compliance must be documented prior to NEPA completion (regardless of NEPA classification). The level of detail that is needed for compliance with Section 106 and state requirements depends on the scale and scope of the project. The size of the area of potential effect and the project activities are the key factors.
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
456.04(1)
Analysis & Methodology
Federal Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (36 CFR 800): Federally funded projects or permitted activities, or projects that occur on federal (including Indian/tribal) land are subject to review under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (implementing regulations 36 CFR 800, see below). Section 106 is a consultative process and federal requirement to avoid, minimize or mitigate impacts to historic properties. Historic properties consist of sites, districts, traditional cultural properties, buildings and structures such as roads, bridges, railways, vessels, and other features of the landscape. WSDOT recognizes the historical significance of roads and highways in Washington State and considers project impacts to roadways at least 50 years of age and deemed significant according to the National Register criteria as determined by the CRS-Historian. The evaluation methods developed by WSDOT and described in the Guidelines for Identifying and Evaluating the Historic Significance of Washington State Highways (PDF 57KB) focus on engineered features. This approach takes into consideration the original alignment, road prism and site distance that reflect the historic character of a roadway. Projects impacting historic highway bridges must also comply with stipulations of the Historic Bridge Program (23 U.S.C. 144(g)) requiring that WSDOT provide an opportunity for the sale or donation of National Register eligible or listed bridges proposed for demolition as part of a replacement project. The WSDOT Cultural Resources Compliance Guidance for Historic Bridge Projects (PDF 113KB) provides a step-by-step guide to the Section 106 and Section 4(f) review process for highway bridges, as illustrated in Exhibit 400-3. The majority of WSDOT projects are reviewed under Section 106 and primarily follow the alternative compliance process illustrated in Exhibit 400-1 and defined in the Statewide Programmatic Agreement (PA) with the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP), Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), and Federal Transit Administration (FTA). WSDOT, on behalf of FHWA or FTA, will (1) define the area of potential effect (APE), (2) initiate consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), Tribal Historic Preservation Officer (THPO), Tribes and other interested and affected parties, (3) identify historic properties with potential to be impacted by project activities within the APE or oversee and review work done by consultants hired to identify historic properties, (4) determine NRHP eligibility of resources and project effects, and (5) work with the Region and consulting parties to develop ways to avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse impacts to cultural resources. Mitigation to resolve adverse effects is achieved through consultation and formalized in a legally binding agreement, either a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) or Programmatic Agreement (PA). Section 106 is a separate regulatory process from NEPA and must be completed for projects that are Categorical Exemptions under NEPA. While both NEPA and NHPA require federal agencies to consider project impacts to historic properties, projects that are categorical exclusions under NEPA are not exempt from Section 106 review. Section 106 is a procedural law whereas Section 4(f) of the US Department of Transportation Act is a substantive law that requires avoidance to use of NRHP eligible or listed historic properties, if prudent and feasible. Section 4(f) applies only to agencies within the US DOT. Requirements for documentation of the Section 4(f) resource (historic property) differ by level of use or impact (see Section 4(f) Evaluation Guidance)
Cultural resources
Chapter 456
A prescribed list of activities presumed to have minimal or no potential to affect cultural resources may be exempted from Section 106 and GEO 21-02 review per stipulations of the Statewide Programmatic Agreement and GEO 21-02 MOU. The Region, Division, or Mode CRS will determine if a project meets criteria for exemption. If the activity cannot be exempted, the region, Division, or Mode CRS will provide guidance on Section 106 or GEO 21-02 consultation for the proposed project. The Program Comment for Common Post-1945 Concrete and Steel Bridges issued by the ACHP in 2012 exempts common (mass produced) post-1945 concrete and steel bridges and culverts from Section 106 review. The intent of the Program Comment is to streamline the review process for those structures lacking distinction; that have not previously been listed or determined eligible for listing on the National Register; and that are not located in or adjacent to historic districts. A list of exceptions to the Program Comment (Bridge Program Comment Excepted Bridges List), identify structures of exceptional quality that remain subject to Section 106 review. The 2005 Section 106 Exemption Regarding Effects to the Interstate Highway System by the Advisory Council of Historic Preservation (ACHP) excludes the majority of Interstate Highway Features from consideration as historic properties under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). FHWA maintains a list (by state) of Nationally and Exceptionally Significant Features of the Federal Interstate Highway System that identify interstate highway bridges and segments of highway containing bridges determined by the FHWA to be of exceptional national significance in Washington State. These properties are subject to review under Section 106.
State (No federal nexus) State funded activities are subject to review under Governor’s Executive Order (GEO) 21-02 and will follow the process outlined in the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation. The MOU will be developed with DAHP and Tribes regarding state funded transportation projects reviewed under GEO 21-02. GEO 21-02 is in effect however we are still developing a review process. Our existing process under GEO 05-05 will be followed until a new agreement is in place. Projects reviewed under Section 106 are not required to undergo a separate State level review for compliance with Governor’s Executive Order 21-02. State funded projects with no federal permit or nexus undergo a similar review process to Section 106, as illustrated in Exhibit 400-2. The Region, Division, or Mode CRS will work with the project office to determine the area of impact and initiate consultation with DAHP and interested tribes subject to GEO 21-02. Certain projects with minimal or no potential to effect cultural resources may be exempted from review per provisions of the GEO 21-02 Memorandum for Understanding (MOU). The Region, Division, or Mode CRS will determine if the project meets the criteria for exemption. The GEO 21-02 compliance process is ongoing until project impacts are determined and an approach to avoid, minimize, or mitigate any impacts is developed and formalized through an MOU agreement with the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation.
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
Required Documentation Cultural resources study documents shall be prepared by the Region, Division, or Mode CRS or by consultants under the direction of the WSDOT CRS for compliance with GEO 21-02 and Section 106. The survey report will conform to the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation reporting guidelines and provide substantive information on each archaeological site or historic structure within the study area, including a physical description, recommendation on significance (NRHP eligibility), and justification for the findings. Properties recommended eligible for NRHP listing must possess significance under the National Register Criteria and possess integrity necessary to convey that significance. Cultural resources consultants may recommend eligibility determinations but the formal determination of eligibility must be made by the Region, Division, or Mode CRS. A general historical context and ethnographic background should be provided and supported by maps and photographs of the project area. Survey results will also address the potential for resources to be encountered during construction and the need for archaeological monitoring. The Environmental Coordinator will develop a project specific Inadvertent Discovery Plan (IDP) using WSDOT IDP template (DOCX 62.5KB) to provide guidance for the unanticipated discovery of resources during construction. If archaeological monitoring is required, a monitoring report will be submitted to consulting parties for review by the Region, Division, or Mode CRS. If an adverse impact to cultural resources will occur because of project activities and avoidance is not feasible, mitigation will be required. Mitigation measures to resolve the adverse impact will be developed through consultation and formalized in an agreement (Memorandum of Understanding for GEO 21-02, or Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) for Section 106). Section 4(f) documentation to comply with the US Department of Transportation Act may be required to address project impacts to NRHP eligible or listed cultural resources, if no feasible or prudent alternative is possible to minimize harm (see Section 4(f) Evaluation Guidance).
456.05 External engagement Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act is a consultative process that requires input from interested and affected parties and the public on federally funded or permitted projects or those on federal land. Section 106 consultation is initiated by the Region Environmental Manager with consulting parties, including the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), Tribal Historic Preservation Officer (THPO), Tribes, partner agencies and the public when a proposed project has potential to affect historic properties. Consultation is an iterative process and provides an opportunity for stakeholders and the public to weigh in on decision making throughout the Section 106 review process. Federally recognized tribes have a specific role in the Section 106 process, per the implementing regulations in 36CFR800. Federally recognized tribes maintain the right to ask for government-to-government consultation with federal agencies, and the level of tribal participation in technical consultation is decided by the tribes, not by WSDOT. Federally recognized tribes are not considered the “public” and can request separate meetings outside of and in addition to public meetings.
Cultural resources
Chapter 456
Stipulations of the Historic Bridge Program (23 U.S.C. 144(g)(5)) require WSDOT to provide an opportunity for the adoption or reuse of historic highway bridges proposed for demolition as part of a replacement project. Proposals are welcome from the public and must demonstrate the recipient can successfully (a) relocate or preserve the bridge in place, and (b) maintain its historic character.
456.06 Internal Roles and responsibilities 456.06(1)
Region/Mode Environmental Manager
Consult with Tribes annually on proposed transportation projects and maintenance activities planned for the Region, Division, or Mode, as required per stipulations of the Statewide Programmatic Agreement and GEO 21-02 MOU. Coordinate with the Region, Division, or Mode CRS to develop mitigation measures and consult on formal agreements (MOU per GEO 21-02, or MOA per Section 106).
456.06(2)
Project Engineer
Coordinate with the Region, Division, or Mode CRS assigned to the project to identify potential cultural resources concerns during project planning and scoping and develop the project APE. Work with CRS to avoid or minimize impacts to cultural resources impacted by project design, or to develop potential mitigation to resolve adverse effects. Mitigation costs are the responsibility of the project and come from project funds.
456.06(3)
Environmental Coordinator
Work with the Region, Division, or Mode CRS to determine appropriate state or federal regulatory environment for projects and determine exemptions, if applicable. Work with the CRS and Project Engineer to develop the project APE, identify consulting parties and participate in consultation under the applicable state or federal regulation. If cultural resources survey is required, work with the CRS to develop a Scope of Work for consultants. Cultural resources work must be reviewed by the Region, Division, or Mode CRS for compliance and quality, prior to submission to consulting parties. Work with the project CRS to develop mitigation strategies to resolve adverse impacts to cultural resources, assist in consultation, and draft agreement documents. Review with Region CRS maintenance activities (see checklist for cultural resources for maintenance activities) for potential impacts to cultural resources. Consult CRS to identify environmental commitments for construction, including archaeological monitoring and curation requirements. The WSDOT project office, with the aid of the project CRS, is responsible to address curation of archaeological collections in contracts with cultural resource consultants. The Environmental Coordinator, with input from the project CRS, will develop a project specific IDP to address the unanticipated discovery of cultural resources during project activities.
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
456.06(4)
Cultural Resources Specialists
Each WSDOT Region, Mode, and Division has an assigned Cultural Resources Specialist, either place-based in the Region or Mode or within the Cultural Resources Program at Headquarters. The CRS reviews all Region, Mode, and Division projects for their potential to impact cultural resources, determines if exemptions from the Statewide Section 106 Programmatic Agreement can be applied. If the project can be exempted, the CRS documents the exemption and notifies the Project Manager. If the project cannot be exempted, the CRS works with the Project Manager to develop an Area of Potential Effects description and map, and coordinates consultation with DAHP, federal agencies, tribes, and the public to complete the steps of the Section 106 process. The ESO Cultural Resources Program Manager will be notified by either the Region, Division, or Mode CRS or the Environmental Manager when issues arise with consulting parties that might have agency-wide implications for WSDOT, or that might set a precedent for other WSDOT projects. The Cultural Resources Program Manager is responsible for developing statewide WSDOT policies regarding cultural resources, and provides expert technical assistance for any Region, Division, or Mode project that encounters difficulties in cultural resources compliance.
456.07 Mitigation If cultural resources cannot be avoided during project planning or construction, mitigation is required to resolve adverse effects to NRHP eligible or listed resources. Mitigation will be determined through consultation and formalized in an agreement (MOU per GEO 21-02, or MOA per Section 106). The Statewide Programmatic Agreement provides guidance for mitigating project impacts. Mitigation efforts must always be commensurate to the scope of the project, be reasonable, cost effective and designed to address the actual effects of the project on historic properties. Standard mitigation measures are often applied, but development of creative mitigation measure is encouraged. Common mitigation measures include excavation, relocation, rehabilitation, recordation, screening, signage and public interpretation. Consult the Region, Division, or Mode CRS and the ESO Cultural Resources Program Manager to develop appropriate mitigation measures.
456.08 Applicable permits & approval process State funded projects subject to review under GEO 21-02 may require an Archaeological Site Alteration & Excavation Permit issued by the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP) for alterations to sites (as defined under RCW 27.53.030(3)). Precontact sites, regardless of NRHP eligibility status, and NRHP eligible or listed historicera sites require a permit for alterations or disturbance. Alterations are defined as any level of disturbance that would change or potentially impact a site but primarily include archaeological excavation, removal and collection of artifacts. The Section 106 compliance process fulfills obligations for the DAHP permit. Archaeological investigations or disturbance of sites, including excavation or removal of archaeological resources from federal lands require a permit issued under the Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA) 16 U.S.C 470. ARPA permits are completed by a WSDOT CRS (qualified applicant) and outline the nature and location of the archaeological investigation or research, and arrangements for curation of artifacts and records.
Cultural resources
Chapter 456
456.09 Abbreviations and acronyms ACHP
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (federal)
BLM
Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the Interior
Corps/COE
US Army Corps of Engineers
CRS
Cultural Resources Specialist
DAHP
Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation
FHWA
Federal Highway Administration
FRA
Federal Railroad Administration
FTA
Federal Transit Administration
GOIA
Governor’s Office of Indian Affairs
NHPA
National Historic Preservation Act
NRHP
National Register of Historic Places
SHPO
State Historic Preservation Officer
TCP
Traditional Cultural Property
THPO
Tribal Historic Preservation Officer
456.10 Glossary Adverse Effect – Occurs when an effect on an historic property diminishes the integrity of the property’s aspects of integrity (see below). See also Determination of Effect (Criteria of adverse Effect: 36 CFR 800.9(b)). Advisory Council on Historic Preservation – An independent federal agency, established under the NHPA, which: (1) advises the President and Congress on matters of historic preservation; (2) carries out Section 106 reviews; and (3) provides technical assistance in historic preservation actions. Affect (Verb) – Action that may change the character of an historic property. Area of Potential Effect (APE) – The geographic area or areas which an undertaking may directly or indirectly cause alterations in the character or use of historic properties. The APE is three dimensional including auditory, visual and ground disturbing activities. The APE is influenced by the scale and nature of an undertaking and may be different for different kinds of effects caused by the undertaking. The APE should be defined before historic properties are identified and not on land ownership (36 CFR 800.2(c). Building – A construction created to shelter any form of human activity, including animal husbandry. Centennial Accord – The Centennial Accord Plan was created in accordance with the 1989 Centennial Accord and the 1999 Centennial Accord Implementation Guidelines. The Centennial Accord mandated that each state agency must have a procedure to implement effective government-to-government relations.
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
Consulting Party – In the Section 106 process, consulting parties include the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), Indian Tribes, representatives of local governments, applicants for federal assistant or approvals, and organizations and individuals with legal or economic relation to the undertaking, or who have concerns with the undertaking’s effect on historic properties. Criteria for Evaluation (National Register Eligibility Criteria) – Standards used for determining the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (36 CFR 60.4(a-d)). See National Register Bulletin 15, pp. 11-24. Cultural Resource – A place, object, location or site of an event that is important to a community or region’s history, traditions, beliefs, customs, or social institutions. Cultural Resource Specialist (CRS) – A WSDOT employee meeting the Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualification Standards (per 36 CFR 61) who advises department staff on policies relating to items of historic/archaeology significance that may be affected by a project and who conducts regulatory compliance procedures. Cultural Resources Management – The body of laws and regulations pertaining to historic, archaeological, and cultural properties, and the manner in which those directives are implemented. Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP) – This agency houses the Washington State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) who serves as SHPO and director of the agency. SHPO locations in state governments are unique to each state. Determination of Effect – A finding, by a federal agency in consultation with SHPO and consulting parties, pursuant to compliance with Section 106 (see definition) that a proposed undertaking will have an effect on historic properties. If an effect is identified, the Criteria of Adverse Effect is applied to determine potential Adverse Effect (see definition). Other possibilities are determinations of No Effect and No Adverse Effect. Determination of Eligibility – Per Section 106 of the NHPA, formal recognition of a property’s eligibility for inclusion, but not actual listing, in the National Register of Historic Places. Determinations of Eligibility may be prepared on National Register Registration Forms (NPS 10-900). District – A significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. May be an archaeological or historic district or may contain elements of both. Effect – Occurs when an undertaking may alter characteristics that qualify a property for inclusion in the National Register (Criteria of Effect: 36 CFR 800.9(a)). Eligible – A property is eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places if it meets the National Register Criteria (see Criteria for Evaluation). Historic Preservation – Identification, evaluation, recordation, documentation, curation, acquisition, protection, management, rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, maintenance and reconstruction, or any combination of the foregoing activities relating to historic properties.
Cultural resources
Chapter 456
Historic Property – A property or cultural resource that is listed in or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, and, under SEPA, in state and local historic registers, including eligible properties that have not yet been discovered or evaluated (such as archaeological sites). Historic properties may be buildings or other structures, objects, sites, districts, archaeological resources, and traditional cultural properties (landscapes). Historic Site (Section 4(f)) – Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places. The term includes properties of traditional religious and cultural importance to an Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian organization that are included in, or are eligible for inclusions in, the National Register. Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) – A formalization of the means of resolving adverse effects agreed upon by the consulting parties, serving to specify mitigation, identify responsibility, render Advisory Council on Historic Preservation comment, and acknowledge effects of the undertaking on historic properties. See also Programmatic Agreement (PA). Mitigation Measures – Actions required to mitigate adverse effects to historic properties. Usually stipulated in an MOA/PA. National Register of Historic Places – The nation’s official listing of properties significant in national, state and/or local history, meeting one or more criteria for evaluation (36 CFR 60.4). Listing is commemorative but may require compliance by property owners with federal/state/ local laws and regulations. May also provide private property owners with opportunities to take advantage of preservation incentives, such as easements and tax relief. Nomination – Official request to have a property listed in the National Register. Documentation is placed on a National Register of Historic Places Registration Form (NPS 10-900) and submitted to the CLG (if appropriate), the SHPO, and the Keeper of the National Register (see definitions). See National Register Bulletin 16A. Object – A construction primarily artistic in nature or relatively small in scale. Programmatic Agreement (PA) – A formal, legally binding agreement typically for a large or complex project or types of undertakings developed under Section 106 that would otherwise require several individual actions (i.e., when effects cannot be fully determined prior to project approval). The agreement is between WSDOT and other state and/or federal agencies. Management Plans (see definition) are often stipulated in PAs (36 CFR 800.13(a)). There are two basic kinds of programmatic agreements:
• A PA that describes the actions that will be taken by the parties in order to meet their Section 106 compliance responsibilities for a specific transportation project, called here a project-specific PA.
• A PA that establishes a process through which the parties will meet their Section 106 responsibilities for an agency program, a category of projects, or a particular type of resource, called here a procedural PA.
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
Site – The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) – Coordinates cultural resource preservation activities in each state; one SHPO per state, usually appointed by the governor. SHPO is charged with reflecting the interests of the state and its citizens in preserving their cultural heritage, which involves a variety of responsibilities (36 CFR 61.4(b)). In Washington State, the SHPO is a governor appointed position housed in the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP), which reviews projects for compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act. Structure – Functional constructions made usually for purposes other than creating shelter. Traditional Cultural Property – A place eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that are (a) rooted in that community’s history, and (b) important in maintaining the cultural identity of the community. The concept is based upon the introductory section of the National Historic Preservation Act, which states that “the historical and cultural foundations of the Nation should be preserved as a living part of our community life in order to give a sense of orientation to the American people.” Tribal Historic Preservation Officer (THPO) – Authorized by the 1992 Amendments to the National Historic Preservation Act. When approved by NPS, THPO replaces SHPO in compliance process on “tribal” lands (Section 101(d)(2)). Undertaking – Any activity that can result in changes in the character or use of historic properties. The activity must be under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of a federal agency or licensed or assisted by a federal agency (36 CFR 800.2(o)).
Cultural resources
Chapter 456
456.11 Exhibit Exhibit 456-1
I.
WSDOT Curation Policy
WSDOT POLICY ON THE CURATION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS This document outlines WSDOT’s policy on the curation of artifacts and records recovered during investigations undertaken in compliance with either Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) as amended (“Section 106”) or the Washington State Archaeological Resources and Sites Act (Chapter 27.53 RCW). Federal regulations establish standards for the preparation and curation of archaeological collections. An archaeological collection is defined as all artifacts, field notes, maps, photographs and other records generated or recovered during an archaeological investigation. Nothing in this policy shall be construed as to preclude consultation with Tribes per the Centennial Accord, or other agreements establishing the rights of Tribes to government-togovernment consultation.
A.
Factors in Determining a Curation Facility In Washington State, there are two main factors that must be considered in determining where archaeological collections will be curated. The first factor is land ownership, as under federal and state law recovered artifacts legally belong to the owner of the property at the time of excavation. The second factor is the regulation under which the archaeological collection was made. Additional factors that can influence the selection of the curation facility include whether the collection contains artifacts from the historic-era, whether there have been previous archaeological investigations at the same site, the volume of the collections, and the location of the curation facility relative to the location of the archaeological site. In some cases, the curation facility has been selected as part of negotiations for a large or complex project that may be subject to negotiated agreements such as a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) or a Programmatic Agreement (PA).
B.
Federal and State Laws, Regulations and Guidance 1.	 36 CFR 79 and the National Historic Preservation Act Federal regulations (36 CFR 79, “Part 79” herein) establish standards for federal agencies to preserve archaeological collections recovered under the authority of Section 110 of the NHPA (16 U.S.C. 470h-2). The mandates under Section 110 are largely applicable to federally owned or controlled properties, however, 36 CFR 79.4(a)(2)(v) states that records and documents relating to Section 106 compliance are subject to the 36 CFR 79 regulation. Under the implementing regulations for Section 106 of the NHPA (36 CFR 800), the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) has issued guidance* regarding the treatment of archaeological sites and artifacts. When data recovery is undertaken as a resolution of adverse effects, the ACHP guidance specifies that “appropriate arrangements for curation of archaeological materials and records should be made.” A MOA or PA should include a provision for curation of archaeological artifacts and
*Recommended Approach for Consultation on Recovery of Significant Information From Archaeological Sites, effective June 17, 1999
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
records at an appropriate facility, if archaeological investigations are undertaken. Curation must be in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Archeology and Historic Preservation, which defines proper curation standards as including the following four criteria:
• Curation facilities have adequate space, facilities and professional personnel.
• Archaeological specimens are maintained so that their information values are not lost through deterioration and records are maintained to a professional archival standard.
• Curated collections are accessible to qualified researchers within a reasonable time of having been requested.
• Collections are available for interpretive purposes, subject to reasonable security precautions.
2.	 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA 1990) protects Native American graves and sacred objects on Federal and tribal lands. Subpart B of NAGPRA applies to the discovery of human remains, funerary objects, sacred object or objects of cultural patrimony on federal or tribal land after November 16, 1990. The law regulates discoveries made during intentional archaeological investigations as well as inadvertent discoveries. If human remains are identified, §10.6 outlines the preferred custody of the human remains and associated objects; tribal custody is preferred, however it is possible that a tribe may request a third party repository temporarily house NAGPRA items. Consultation is required throughout the process; §10.5 outlines the consultation requirements. If burials or sacred objects are found on federal land during an archaeological survey conducted under Section 106, the federal agency landowner is required to consult with the Tribe concerning treatment of the remains or sacred objects.
3.	 Archaeological Sites and Resources Act (Chapter 27.53 RCW) The Washington State Archaeological Sites and Resources Act (Chapter 27.53 RCW) requires an archaeological excavation and removal permit, pursuant to Chapter 25-48 WAC, in order to excavate within the boundaries of an archaeological site on public and private lands in Washington State, unless there is a federal nexus for the project which would require compliance with Section 106. If the project is on public lands, permit applicants must identify the curation facility that will receive the collections from the project. This facility must meet Part 79 standards. If the project is conducted on private land, the records must be stored at a curation facility even if the private landowner wishes to retain custody of the artifacts. Excavation permit applicants may temporarily store collections in a repository that meets Part 79 standards until the appropriate Tribe establishes facilities that meet Part 79 standards.
Cultural resources
Chapter 456
4.	 Indian Graves and Records Act (Chapter 27.44 RCW) and Historic Cemeteries and Graves (Chapter 68.60 RCW) The Washington State Indian Graves and Records Act (Chapter 27.44 RCW) allows “examination” of Native American graves or cairns on non-federal or non-tribal lands within the State of Washington as long as the collected material is “destined for reburial or perpetual preservation in a duly recognized archaeological repository” (RCW 27.44.020). If human remains are identified on non-federal or non-tribal lands within the state of Washington, several laws outline the process that must be followed (RCWs 68.50.645, 27.44.055, and 68.60.055). There is no expectation that these human remains will be curated.
C.
Expectations for Collecting Artifacts during Archaeological Investigations There are generally three types of archaeological investigations conducted for WSDOT projects: survey (during which a site would be identified); testing (during which a site would be evaluated); and data recovery (during which unavoidable impacts to a site would be mitigated). Normally, WSDOT will not have purchased right-of-way (ROW) when survey and testing studies are conducted for proposed projects. It is more likely that WSDOT would have purchased the required ROW before undertaking data recovery (excavation), although this is not always the case. Therefore, it is important that the status of property ownership during each phase of archaeological investigation be known. Recovered artifacts legally belong to the owner of the property at the time of excavation. A private landowner’s consent will be required to curate artifacts at the selected repository.
1.	 Survey Generally, no artifacts are collected during survey. Exceptions would include unique or rare artifacts (such as a pre-contact fluted projectile point) or artifacts that would be in danger of being destroyed if not collected from the site. If investigations at a site identified during survey continue and change into testing, the associated field records generated by WSDOT or its consultants during the survey (maps, photographs, field notes) are expected to be curated with the subsequent testing collections.
2.	 Testing Testing of an archaeological site is usually carried out under a site-specific testing plan which will be approved by WSDOT in advance of the fieldwork. The testing plan should outline the research design including artifact analysis. It is generally expected that artifacts and samples will be collected during testing efforts. The resulting collections would be curated at a repository that would be identified prior to fieldwork. If testing will be conducted prior to WSDOT purchasing the required ROW, WSDOT will attempt to determine before testing is initiated whether the property owner intends to donate the collection to a repository that meets Part 79 Standards. The property 
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
owner may be asked to sign a letter of intent to donate the collections prior to the start of testing. A deed of gift would be signed by the landowner at the time of transfer of custody. If investigations at a site will continue from testing into a data recovery phase, WSDOT will typically retain the artifacts recovered during testing until the data recovery report is completed. The repository should be consulted at this point to discuss whether the materials from the testing phase and data recovery phase should be treated as separate collections or one large, multi-phase collection; particularly if there is a significant amount of time between phases of archaeological investigation. If no further investigation will be conducted or if another consultant will conduct the next investigation, WSDOT shall direct the transfer of the testing collection to the selected repository.
3.	 Data Recovery Archaeological sites determined to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places are usually eligible under Criterion D for their ability to yield information important in history or prehistory. Archaeological data recovery excavations involve the recovery of that important information, which is contained in the artifacts, identified features, and associated records. The purpose of curation is to retain and preserve this information for future researchers. Archaeological data recovery generally involves a large expenditure of public funds, and it is important that these collections be preserved for the public benefit. When data recovery excavations will be conducted prior to WSDOT purchasing the required ROW, WSDOT will attempt to determine before excavations are initiated whether the property owner intends to donate the collection to a repository that meets Part 79 Standards. The property owner may be asked to sign a letter of intent to donate the collections prior to the start of excavation. A deed of gift would be signed at the time of transfer of custody.
4.	 Monitoring Archaeological monitoring during active construction projects is another type of activity WSDOT conducts. Typically, a monitoring plan outlines the types of artifacts that would be considered significant if discovered and identified during the project, and designates a curation facility. If an archaeological site is identified during monitoring but it is not considered a significant site, the artifacts will not be collected. In rare cases a unique isolated artifact may be identified during monitoring and selected for collection. Disposition of these artifacts would be on a case-by-case basis.
D.
Disposition of Archaeological Artifacts and Records from State Land, Federal Land, or Tribal Land When archaeological sites are identified during cultural resource studies for Federal-aid or State funded projects, WSDOT is responsible for the disposition of the artifacts and records at the conclusion of the project. The status of property ownership at the time of the archaeological excavations will determine whether artifacts are curated in a repository or returned to a private property owner. Archaeological collections are not to be permanently stored at a consultant’s office. It is the responsibility of the WSDOT Project Engineer with
Cultural resources
Chapter 456
assistance from the Cultural Resources Specialist to ensure that archaeological collections are curated at a facility that meets the standards of Part 79 at the conclusion of the project. WSDOT is responsible for including language regarding curation in contracts with cultural resource consultants.
1.	 Collections from State Property When WSDOT owns fee title to a property at the time archaeological testing is conducted, or when artifacts are recovered from property owned by another state agency, WSDOT will curate the collections at the University of Washington’s Burke Museum (per the terms of Participation Agreement GCA-6616), unless otherwise negotiated as a specific mitigation measure.
2.	 Collections from Federal Land When artifacts are recovered from federally owned land the collection is the property and responsibility of that federal agency. Unless there is an existing programmatic agreement with the federal agency specifying curation requirements†, WSDOT will submit the collection to the federal agency or their designated repository at the conclusion of the project.
3.	 Collections from Tribal Land When artifacts are recovered from tribal land, the decision on where to curate the collection is made by the tribe. Over a dozen tribes in Washington and in neighboring states have curation facilities. Some tribes without curation facilities have built relationships with third party curation facilities such as the Burke Museum.
E.
Disposition of Collections from Private Property When WSDOT will conduct an archaeological investigation on private property, the WSDOT Cultural Resources Specialist (CRS) must discuss the issue of archaeological collections and their disposition with the landowner in advance of the fieldwork. This includes temporary easements. When artifacts could be recovered from privately owned land, the WSDOT CRS will suggest that the landowner donate the artifacts to a facility that complies with the Part 79 standards. If the landowner agrees to donate the artifacts, the WSDOT CRS should ask the owner to sign a letter of intent to donate (if the collections have not been excavated yet) or the selected museum’s deed of gift agreement (if the collections have been excavated). The deed of gift agreement allows the museum to acquire legal title to the artifacts. When a property owner expresses a desire to have artifacts returned, the WSDOT CRS should determine whether the owner wishes to retain the entire artifact assemblage or is only interested in certain artifacts. If the owner is only interested in keeping a selection of artifacts, the WSDOT CRS should ask the owner to donate the remainder to a museum that meets Part 79 standards. If the property owner declines to sign a letter of intent to donate or a deed of gift agreement, then the artifacts must be returned to the landowner.
† As of , the only programmatic agreement WSDOT has entered into with a land owning federal agency is the US Forest Service. 
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
If possible, the artifacts should not be returned until all consultation is completed, the requested analyses are completed, and a final report is accepted by WSDOT. It is important to note that records and documentation from the archaeological studies do not belong to the property owner and must be submitted to a curation facility that meets Part 79 Standards. WSDOT will submit the records to the Burke Museum unless a tribal museum meeting Part 79 Standards requests to curate the documentation.
F.
Disposition of Collections Collected under an MOA or PA For large or complex projects, WSDOT will typically enter into a MOA or PA to address cultural resources. Because the consultation process to develop an agreement document must weigh numerous factors, and because addressing curation issues could be a mitigation measure, development of the MOA will be negotiated among consulting parties in order to address specific concerns. Curation should be addressed within the MOA including designating the repository, or creating one, to house the archaeological collections.
G.
Submitting Collections to the Selected Curation Facility Collections should be submitted to the selected repository as soon as is practical after approval of the final report by WSDOT, unless otherwise stated in an MOA or other formal agreement. It is not acceptable for collections to remain in the care of consultants or WSDOT indefinitely.
1.	 Facility-Specific Curation Guidelines Once the curation facility is selected and before data recovery is undertaken, WSDOT will request the facility’s curation guidelines for the preparation of an incoming collection. WSDOT or its consultant will prepare the collection to meet these guidelines prior to delivering the collection to the facility. If the selected facility does not have any specific guidelines for the preparation of incoming collections, WSDOT or its consultant will follow minimum curation guidelines developed by WSDOT that are consistent with Part 79.
2.	 Documentation Accompanying the Collection WSDOT or its consultant should prepare a packing inventory listing the contents of each box and a collections transmittal form (which will be provided by the repository). The selected repository will also likely have a deed of gift or similar document to transfer title of the collection to the museum.
3.	 Payment of Curation Fees Curation fees are to be considered part of the project compliance or mitigation cost and must be included in project budgets.
Cultural resources
H.
Chapter 456
Curation of Legacy Collections Legacy collections are those archaeological collections made prior to the passage of Part 79 in 1990. WSDOT’s legacy collections date to the 1950s. The WSDOT will consider the appropriateness of integrating the study of legacy collections in cases where WSDOT will be investigating or otherwise impacting a site that has been previously excavated. If feasible, the WSDOT CRS will identify the location of the legacy collections (including records). If the legacy collections are not stored at a facility that meets Part 79 standards, then WSDOT will determine if the collection should be transferred to another repository. If data recovery will be conducted at a site with legacy collections, WSDOT shall consider the feasibility of incorporating review and/or analysis of the legacy collections as part of the data recovery effort. The review/analysis should be conducted prior to data recovery to provide context for current investigation and to potentially reduce the sampling that will be required. It is anticipated that this approach will reduce the overall cost of data recovery efforts to WSDOT.
II.
WSDOT POLICY ON THE USE OF MUSEUMS AND INFORMATION CENTERS AS POTENTIAL MITIGATION Because Section 106 of the NHPA and NEPA do not provide limits on potential mitigation measures, and because both Section 106 and the Centennial Accord require WSDOT to conduct good-faith consultation and implement effective government-to-government relations with tribes with lands or resources affected by WSDOT’s projects, WSDOT must evaluate the appropriateness of mitigation measures on a case-by-case basis. WSDOT will carefully consider the issues and concerns raised during consultation and develop mitigation measures to address the specific adverse effects of a particular project. Consistent with Section 106, WSDOT will take into account “the magnitude of the undertaking and the nature of its effects upon historic properties, the likely effects on historic properties, and the relationship of the Federal involvement to the undertaking” (§800.6(a)(4)) when considering appropriate resolution of adverse effects.
A.
Exhibits/Displays WSDOT has prepared exhibits, displays and other types of public information such as books and documentaries, on cultural resources, as mitigation for impacts to those cultural resources. In addition, WSDOT will encourage the repositories that hold collections generated during WSDOT projects to exhibit or display those collections as the repository deems appropriate; decisions on whether to exhibit or display are made by the repository.
B.
Stand-Alone Facilities In cases where a WSDOT project may have long-term adverse effects on a community or neighborhood, WSDOT will consider development of stand-alone facilities such as information centers as a mitigation measure. The time that a stand-alone facility is needed will be determined through consultation for each project.
Chapter 456
Cultural resources
This page intentionally left blank.
Chapter 457 457.01 457.02 457.03 457.04 457.05 457.06 457.07 457.08 457.09 457.10
Section 4(f) evaluation
Introduction Applicable statutes, regulations, executive orders, & agreements Considerations during project development Analysis & documentation requirements External involvement Internal roles & responsibilities Applicable permits and approvals Mitigation Abbreviations and acronyms Glossary
457.01 Introduction Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act of 1966 declares a national policy to “preserve the natural beauty of the countryside, public park and recreation land, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and historic sites.” It is one of the most stringent and complex environmental laws related to transportation. As a result, Section 4(f) is also one of the most frequently litigated environmental statutes and the most common cause of court injunctions delaying projects (FHWA Success in Stewardship Newsletter, ). Section 4(f) is a federal requirement and must be considered in any NEPA document involving a USDOT agency (FHWA, FTA, FRA, and FAA). This work may be:
• Included in the NEPA document and supported by appropriate documentation.
• Evaluated separately and documented in an Individual Section 4(f) Evaluation. Section 4(f) prohibits the incorporation of land from a Section 4(f) resource into a transportation facility unless there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the use of that land. The law also protects Section 4(f) properties from proximity impacts that substantially diminish the use or value of the resource. Substantial proximity impacts are considered to be a “Constructive Use” even though the project does not actually use land from the resource. FHWA requires a Section 4(f) Evaluation be completed for proximity impacts when they substantially impair the activities and attributes that qualified the Section 4(f) property for protection. Such impacts may include:
• Noise
• Vibrations
• Aesthetics
• Access See the FHWA Section 4(f) webpage and WSDOT Land use webpage for additional guidance, templates and resources. User note: Section 4(f) is sometimes confused with Section 6(f) of the Federal Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (LWCF). WSDOT’s compliance with Section 6(f) of LWCF is defined in Chapter 455, Land Use.
Chapter 457
Section 4(f) evaluation
457.01(1)
Identifying a Section 4(f) Property
Section 4(f) applies to historic sites of significance, significant publicly owned parks and recreation areas, wildlife and waterfowl refuges. Historic sites of national, state, or local significance qualify as Section 4(f) properties regardless of ownership or public access. Historic sites must be on or eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places to be protected. Parks and recreation areas must be open to the public to qualify, but wildlife and waterfowl refuges may restrict access to preserve quality habitat. Privately owned recreational properties may qualify for consideration under Section 4(f) if a government agency has a permanent interest in the land (such as an easement). Publicly owned facilities such as parks, recreation areas and wildlife and waterfowl refuges are assumed to be significant unless the public Official with Jurisdiction concludes that the entire site is not significant. FHWA must conduct an independent evaluation of the property and concur with the Official’s decision. If the publicly owned facility is primarily used for transportation and is an integral part of the local transportation system, the requirements of Section 4(f) would not apply since it is not solely serving a transportation purpose and not solely a recreational purpose. See FHWA’s Section 4(f) Policy Paper for more detailed guidance. The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (WSRA) designates certain rivers (or river segments) for special protection to preserve them in a free-flowing condition for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations. The act also identifies various “study rivers” for possible inclusion in the Wild and Scenic Rivers System. Currently, all of the designated Wild and Scenic Rivers in Washington State are administered by the United States Forest Service (USFS) in accordance with 36 CFR 297. A comprehensive management plan is in place for all WSRA-designated rivers. The plan describes the use and type of construction allowed in each segment of the river. River segments designated for recreational use, segments in publicly owned public parks, recreation areas, or wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and segments with historic or archeological sites, are subject to Section 4(f). Segments that are privately owned (except for historic and archeological sites on private land) and segments on publicly owned lands closed to the general public (e.g., military bases, Indian Reservations, etc.) and whose primary purpose is not a Section 4(f) use, are not subject to Section 4(f). If the management plan does not identify a specific function for the river segment, then Section 4(f) does not apply. For projects led by FRA, see their Additional Information on Section 4(f) and Programmatic Evaluations. For projects led by FTA, see their standard operating procedure for guidance on the recommended timing of the Section 4(f) processes to improve understanding in the transit context.
Section 4(f) evaluation
Chapter 457
457.02 Applicable statutes, regulations, executive orders, & agreements 457.02(1)
Federal
• 42 United States Code (USC) 4321 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA)
• 23 CFR 774
• 23 U.S.C 138 Preservation of Parkland
• 49 U.S.C. 303 Policy on lands, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and historic sites
• Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act 1966
• Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act 1966
• Section 6(f) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act 1965
457.02(2)
State
• Not applicable
457.02(3)
Local
• Not applicable
457.03 Considerations during project development 457.03(1)
Planning
Identify Section 4(f) properties in and near the proposed project area.
457.03(2)
Scoping
Identify Section 4(f) properties in and near the proposed project area.
457.03(3)
Design
Document Section 4(f) properties in and near the project area consistent with the types of use. Document the research and explain where the resources are and why we made the call. Include surrounding properties to ensure they aren’t impacted.
457.03(4)
Construction
Ensure that staging areas and the project activities do not affect surrounding Section 4(f) properties that were identified near the project area.
457.03(5)
Maintenance and Operations
There are no requirements for Section 4(f).
457.04 Analysis & documentation requirements This section describes analysis and documentation requirements based on regulatory requirements for USDOT agencies (FHWA, FTA, FRA, and FAA). Determine level of detail based on complexity/size of project, expected severity of impacts, and potential for public controversy.
Chapter 457
Section 4(f) evaluation
457.04(1)
Analysis & documentation for NEPA
WSDOT policy requires Section 4(f) consideration in any NEPA document. However, not all NEPA actions require a full Section 4(f) evaluation. The NEPA document needs to identify if any Section 4(f) resources exist in the project area. If the project will involve more than minor ROW acquisition or involve any relocations, the NEPA document should include information about what research was done to determine if any Section 4(f) resources were present. If there are Section 4(f) properties, there should be documentation attached to address use of those resources (e.g. De minimis or Individual Evaluation), or information about why such documentation is not necessary (e.g. the resource is not acquired, or an exemption applies such as Temporary Occupancy). Right size your document to fit your project. Four approaches are typically used:
Exceptions Refer to 23 CFR 774, FHWA Section 4(f) Tutorial and Section 4(f) Policy Paper for background, fundamental definitions and requirements of Section 4(f). Review the list of Other Considerations to identify properties that do not fit neatly into the Section 4(f) definition. 23 CFR 774.13 lists seven exceptions to the requirements for Section 4(f) approval. The most common exceptions that WSDOTs uses are (a) for historic bridges and (b) temporary occupancy.
Railroads and rail transit line exemption Section 11502 of the FAST Act (23 U.S.C. 138(f) and 49 U.S.C. 303(h)) exempts rail road and rail transit lines that are in use or that were historically used for transportation of goods or passengers from Section 4(f) review. The exemption applies regardless of whether the railroad or rail transit line is listed on or is eligible for listing on the NRHP. However, the exemption does not apply to:
• Rail stations or transit stations.
• Bridges or tunnels located on a rail line that has been abandoned, lines that have been rail banked, and lines that have been reserved for future transportation of goods or passengers.
Interstate Exemption from Section 106 and Section 4(f) Federal agencies no longer need to consider the vast majority of the Interstate System as historic property under Section 106 and Section 4(f) requirements. However, under Section II of the ACHP’s Section 106 exemption, certain elements of the Interstate System, such as bridges, tunnels, and rest stops, shall be excluded from the exemption’s provisions if they have national and/or exceptional historic significance. Find the list of significant Interstate Highways elements on FHWA’s List of Nationally Exceptionally Significant Features of the Federal Interstate Highway System webpage.
Section 4(f) evaluation
Chapter 457
De minimis impacts A de minimis impact is one that, after taking into account any measures to minimize harm (such as avoidance, minimization, mitigation or enhancement measures), results in either:
• A Section 106 finding of no adverse effect or no historic properties affected on a historic property; or
• A determination that the project would not adversely affect the activities, features, or attributes qualifying a park, recreation area, or refuge for protection under Section 4(f).
Programmatic Section 4(f) Evaluation FHWA developed five Programmatic Section 4(f) Evaluations that can be used to streamline the evaluation process. Using a programmatic saves time by eliminating circulation of the draft, legal sufficiency review, and coordination with other federal agencies (DOI, USDA, and HUD). Coordination with the Official with Jurisdiction is still required. FHWA provides more detailed explanation of each of the Nationwide Section 4(f) Programmatic Evaluation categories on their webpage. If the project impacts a Section 4(f) property and it does not qualify for a programmatic evaluation, exception, or de minimis, then an individual Section 4(f) Evaluation must be completed. The description and criteria for the five Programmatic Section 4(f) Evaluations are: 1. Independent Walkway and Bikeways – Only applies to independent bikeway or walkway projects that impact recreation and park areas for active recreation and open space. The Official with Jurisdiction over the Section 4(f) property must give his/her approval in writing that the project is acceptable and consistent with the designated use and that all possible planning to minimize harm has been done. This programmatic cannot be used if the project would require the use of:
• Critical habitat of endangered species.
• Land from a publicly owned wildlife or waterfowl refuge.
• Land from a historical site of local, state or national significance.
• Unusual circumstances such as major impacts, adverse effects or controversy. 2. Historic Bridges – Applies to bridges to be replaced or rehabilitated with federal funds. The bridge must be on, or eligible for, the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The FHWA Division Administrator concurs with the facts presented in the alternatives, findings and mitigation. The FAST Act exempts common post 1945 bridges from Section 4(f) to align with requirement of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (Sec 1303, 23 USC 138(e)).
Chapter 457
Section 4(f) evaluation
3. Minor Involvement with Historic Sites – Applies when the project improves the operational characteristics, safety, and/or physical condition of the highway on the existing alignment. The historic site must be located adjacent to the existing highway to qualify for the programmatic. Such projects include:
• “4 R” work (resurfacing, restoration, rehabilitation and reconstruction).
• Safety improvements (shoulder widening and correction of substandard curves or intersections).
• Traffic operation improvements (signalization, channelization, turning and climbing lanes).
• Bicycle and pedestrian facilities as part of a larger project.
• Bridge replacements on the same alignment.
• Construction of additional lanes. This programmatic cannot be used:
• For a project including removal or alteration of historic buildings, structures, or objects on the historic site.
• For a project requiring an EIS, unless the Section 4(f) impact is discovered after approval of the EIS.
• For a project that requires disturbance or removal of archaeological resources that are important to preserve in place. The State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and/or the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) must concur in the determination.
• The impacts on the historic attributes of the property must be minor. Minor is narrowly defined as “no effect” or “no adverse effect” under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act and 36 CFR 800. The ACHP must concur with the “no effect” determination. The SHPO must agree, in writing, with the impact assessment and the proposed mitigation. 4. Minor Involvement with Parks, Recreation Areas, and Waterfowl and Wildlife Refuges – Applies when the project improves the operational characteristics, safety, and/or physical condition of the highway on the existing alignment. The public park, recreation lands, or wildlife and waterfowl refuge must be located adjacent to the state highway. Such projects include:
• “4 R” work (resurfacing, restoration, rehabilitation, and reconstruction).
• Safety improvements (shoulder widening and correction of substandard curves or intersections).
• Traffic operation improvements (signalization, channelization, turning an climbing lanes).
• Bicycle and pedestrian facilities as part of a larger project.
• Bridge replacements on the same alignment.
• Construction of additional lanes.
Section 4(f) evaluation
Chapter 457
The total amount of land to be acquired from any site shall not exceed: Total Size of Section 4(f) Site
Maximum to be Acquired
< 10 acres
10 percent of site
10–100 acres
1 acre
>100 acres
1 percent of site
This programmatic cannot be used:
• For construction of a highway in a new location.
• For a project that requires an EIS.
• For projects that impair the intended use of the remaining Section 4(f) land. The determination includes proximity impacts and is made by FHWA in concurrence with the Officials with Jurisdiction over the Section 4(f) property. Impairment shall be documented. Show the size, use, and nature of the impairment. Document noise, air and water pollution, wildlife and habitat effect, aesthetic values, and other impacts deemed relevant. Coordinate with the appropriate Federal Agency if the Section 4(f) property is encumbered by a Federal Interest. Ascertain the agency’s position on the land conversion or transfer. The programmatic does not apply if the agency objects. Federal Interest includes:
• Purchase or improvement with federal funds through the Land and Water Conservation Funds Act, Federal Aid in Fish Restoration Act (Dingle-Johnson Act), the Federal Aid in Wildlife Act (Pittman-Robertson Act).
• Former designation as federal surplus property. The Officials with Jurisdiction over the Section 4(f) lands must agree, in writing, with the impact assessment and the proposed mitigation. 5. Transportation Projects That Have a Net Benefit to a Section 4(f) Property – Applies to federally assisted transportation improvement projects on existing or new alignments. The Administration and Officials with Jurisdiction will make the determination.
Individual Section 4(f) evaluation Identifies and evaluates avoidance alternatives and identifies and evaluates measures to minimize harm to the Section 4(f) property. An avoidance alternative must avoid using any Section 4(f) property. An alternative that avoids one Section 4(f) property but uses a different Section 4(f) property instead, is not an avoidance alternative. If the Section 4(f) evaluation concludes that there is no avoidance alternative that is feasible and prudent, and more than one reasonable alternative uses a Section 4(f) property, then the project sponsor must evaluate which alternative would cause the least overall harm. An individual Section 4(f) evaluation is processed in two phases — a draft and a final — both of which must be submitted to the FHWA Division Office or Federal Lands Division Office for review and approval. The Section 4(f) evaluation is subject to a legal sufficiency review by FHWA’s Office of Chief Counsel. The review is intended to ensure that Section 4(f) requirements have been met.
Chapter 457
Section 4(f) evaluation
A Section 4(f) individual evaluation can be submitted as part of and EA or EIS or documented as a separate document. For projects eligible as a CE, the Section 4(f) evaluation should be a separate document. If the proposed project has multiple Section 4(f) resources in the vicinity, with varying types of use, document each resource accordingly. If an individual Section 4(f) Evaluation is required, it should include information on all the Section 4(f) resources in the vicinity. If there are no uses that require an Individual Section 4(f) Evaluation, then each resource can be documented separately using the appropriate template (exception, de minimis, etc).
Analysis & documentation for SEPA only (No federal nexus) There are no state Section 4(f) requirement as it is a federal requirement and only considered for projects involving a USDOT agency.
Analysis & documentation for Section 6(f) Find more detailed guidance for the Section 6(f) process and a comparison between Section 4(f) and Section 6(f) in Chapter 455.
Analysis & documentation for Section 106 A property containing significant cultural resources is considered a Section 4(f) property. Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act defines the process for determining the significance of a cultural resource. Therefore, completion of a Section 106 evaluation is an integral part of the Section 4(f) evaluation. Both laws mandate consideration of cultural resources, but here are some key differences you should be aware of:
• Section 4(f) requires a special effort be made to avoid the use of cultural resources by documenting that all possible planning was used to avoid the resources and minimize harm. Section 106 requires consideration of the project effects on cultural resources.
• Section 4(f) applies only to USDOT agencies. Section 106 applies to any federal agency.
• Section 4(f) applies to actual use or occupancy of the site. Section 106 involves assessment of adverse effect on the property. A direct correlation cannot be made between “use” and “effect.”
• The Section 106 process is integral to the Section 4(f) process when cultural resources are involved. The Section 4(f) process is not integral to the Section 106 process.
• The Section 4(f) process applies a more stringent analysis with respect to totally avoiding cultural resources than the Section 106 process.
• Archeological resources not considered important for preservation in place are covered by exception 23 CFR 774.13 (b) and do not require a Section 4(f) evaluation.
Section 4(f) evaluation
Chapter 457
457.05 External engagement 457.05(1)
De Minimis
The public must be informed of the de minimis determination and given an opportunity to comment on the decision. This may be done as part of the NEPA public notice process for an EA or EIS. If your project is a CE, it can be accomplished in a newsletter, city council meeting, or project open house. The notice should fully describe the impacts to the Section 4(f) resource.
457.05(2)
Individual Evaluation
An Individual Section 4(f) Evaluation must be circulated to the Department of Interior for a 30 day comment period, and if applicable to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and it should also be incorporated into and circulated with the NEPA document if an EA or EIS is prepared.
457.05(3)
Section 106 and 4f
The official(s) with jurisdiction must be informed of the intent to make a de minimis impact determination and must concur in a finding of no adverse effect or no historic properties affected in accordance with 36 CFR Part 800. Compliance with 36 CFR Part 800 satisfies the public involvement and agency coordination requirement for de minimis impact findings for historic sites. WSDOT shall seek and consider the views of the public in a manner that reflects the nature and complexity of the undertaking and its effects on historic properties, and the likely interest of the public in the effects on historic properties pursuant to Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act and its implementing regulations 36 CFR 800, as amended. Consistent with the intent of 36 CFR Part 800.3(c-f), public involvement in the Section 106 process is based on a demonstrated interest, including any landowner whose land may be affected by an undertaking. Public comment and the release of information pertaining to cultural resources hereunder shall be consistent with 36 CFR 800.2(d), 800.3(e), and 800.1 l(c) (l and 3).
457.06 Internal roles and responsibilities 457.06(1)
Region/Modal Environmental Manager
Signs de minimis and Individual Section 4(f) documents.
457.06(2)
Region Environmental Coordinator
Works with HQ ESO and FHWA to determine how to document any Section 4(f) uses. FHWA is the decision-maker.
457.06(3)
WSDOT HQ ESO
Supports project offices when identifying and documenting activities that may impact a Section 4(f) property.
Chapter 457
Section 4(f) evaluation
457.07 Applicable permits & approval process To secure federal approval and funding for transportation projects that use Section 4(f) properties, WSDOT must demonstrate that:
• There are unique problems or unusual factors that prohibit use of alternatives that avoid these properties.
• The cost of alternatives that avoid these properties is extraordinary.
• The social, economic and environmental impacts or community disruption resulting from an alternative that avoids Section 4(f) properties reach an extraordinary magnitude. FHWA and other USDOT agencies may not approve a transportation program or project that uses such properties unless:
• The use will have no more than de minimis impact.
• There is no feasible and prudent alternative and all possible planning has been done to minimize harm. The FHWA Engineer signs and approves all Section 4(f) use documentation. You must also obtain concurrence with the property’s Official with Jurisdiction (OWJ) on all uses and most activities that meet the exceptions listed in 23 CFR 774. Individual Section 4(f) evaluations are processed in two distinct stages: draft and final. Draft evaluations must be circulated to the U.S. DOI and shared with the official(s) with jurisdiction. The public may review and comment on a draft evaluation during the NEPA process. When a project is processed as a CE the Section 4(f) evaluation must be circulated independently to the U.S. DOI. In all cases, final Section 4(f) evaluations are subject to FHWA legal sufficiency review prior to approval (23 CFR 774.5(d)). There are no permits associated with Section 4(f).
457.08 Mitigation Measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts or enhance the resource should be considered before the de minimis determination is made. FHWA makes the de minimis determination based on a review of the project documentation. Detail the work that was done, including any mitigation, required to support the de minimis determination in the NEPA document. Written concurrence from the Officials with Jurisdiction must be included in the document. If an individual Section 4(f) analysis of avoidance alternatives concludes that there is no feasible and prudent avoidance alternative, then the FHWA may only approve the alternative that causes the least overall harm to the Section 4(f) property. 23 CFR 774.3(c) includes a list of factors to consider in making this determination of least overall harm. These factors include the ability to mitigate adverse impacts to Section 4(f) property; the relative severity of remaining harm, after mitigation, to Section 4(f) property; and the relative significance of each Section 4(f) property. Chapter 490 provides guidance on how to incorporate environmental commitments into project contracts. This is important for NEPA/SEPA commitments as well as regulatory permit commitments.
Section 4(f) evaluation
Chapter 457
457.09 Abbreviations and acronyms 4(f)
Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act of 1966
6(f)
Section 6(f) of the Federal Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (LWCF)
FAST Act
Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act
FHWA
Federal Highway Administration
FTA
Federal Transit Administration
FRA
Federal Railroad Administration
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
NRHP
National Register of Historic Places
SAFETEA-LU
Safe Accountable Flexible Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users
USDOT
United States Department of Transportation
SHPO
State Historic Preservation Officer
THPO
Tribal Historic Preservation Officer
457.10 Glossary All Possible Planning – All reasonable measures identified in the Section 4(f) evaluation to minimize harm or mitigate for adverse impacts and effects. Constructive Use – A constructive use occurs when the transportation project does not incorporate land from a Section 4(f) property, but the project’s proximity impacts are so severe that the protected activities, features, or attributes that qualify a property for protection under Section 4(f) are substantially impaired. Substantial impairment occurs only when the protected activities, features, or attributes of the property are substantially diminished. De minimis Impact – For historic sites, de minimis impact means that the appropriate administering agency has determined, in accordance with 36 CFR 800, that no historic property is affected by the project or that the project will have “no adverse effect” on the historic property in question. For parks, recreation areas, and wildlife and waterfowl refuges, a de minimis impact is one that will not adversely affect the features, attributes or activities qualifying the property for protection under Section 4(f). Feasible and Prudent Avoidance Alternative – A feasible and prudent avoidance alternative avoids using Section 4(f) property and does not cause other severe problems of a magnitude that substantially outweighs the importance of protecting the Section 4(f) property. Historic Site (Section 4(f)) – Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places. The term includes properties of traditional religious and cultural importance to an Indian Tribe or Native Hawaiian organization that are included in, or are eligible for inclusion in, the National Register. Officials With Jurisdiction – As defined in 23 CFR 774.17, officials of the agency that owns or administers the property in question. For historic sites, the SHPO or THPO may serve as the Official with Jurisdiction.
Chapter 457
Section 4(f) evaluation
Programmatic Section 4(f) Evaluations – Can be used in place of individual evaluations for highway projects where uses are considered minor. To date there are five programmatic evaluations that have been approved for use nationwide. See Section 447.03 of this chapter for criteria and FHWA Nationwide Section 4(f) Programmatic Evaluation webpage. Section 4(f) Property – A publicly owned park, recreation area, or wildlife and water fowl refuge of national, state, or local significance. Also includes historic sites of national, state or local significance. Use – “Use” of a Section 4(f) property occurs:
• When land is permanently incorporated into a transportation facility.
• When a temporary occupancy of land has an adverse impact on the resource that the park, recreation area, refuge or historic site was created to protect.
• When there is a constructive use of the property.
Chapter 458 458.01 458.02 458.03 458.04 458.05 458.06 458.07 458.08 458.09 458.10
Social and community effects
Introduction Applicable statutes, regulations, & executive orders Social and community considerations during project development Analysis & documentation requirements External involvement Internal roles & responsibilities Mitigation Applicable permits and approvals Abbreviations and acronyms Glossary
458.01 Introduction Section 109(h) of the Federal Aid Highway Act requires an assessment of the “social, economic, and environmental impacts” under NEPA. The Social and community effects analysis is prepared for projects that trigger a NEPA EA or EIS to examine how the proposed transportation improvement affects the people who live, work, and play in the vicinity of the project. Generally, those working on the Social and community effects analysis will closely coordinate with the project’s communications team, Office of Equal Opportunity and the preparers of Noise, Air Quality, Section 4(f), Hazardous Materials, Public Services and Utilities, Transportation and Visual Impact analyses. This information is also used to inform the project’s Environmental justice analysis to determine whether adverse impacts to a community are high and disproportionate. The purpose of the Social and community effects analysis is to: Gather community input, summarize the community’s existing conditions, and disclose the proposed project’s impact on residential and commercial properties, public services, community connectivity. New in the 2021 Manual, Title VI and Environmental Justice analyses have moved out from under this chapter, into a new Chapter 460. Displacement of people and businesses to make room for a transportation project affects both the social network and the economy of a community. WSDOT follows a standard, systematic process for relocation in compliance with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Polices Act of 1970 as amended. The legal requirements and relocation process are described in our Right of Way Manual Chapter 12. Public services include schools, churches, community centers, day care facilities, hospitals, nursing homes, medical and dental clinics, fire stations, police stations, cemeteries, and social service providers. Utilities include publicly and privately owned electric power, gas, oil and petroleum products, steam, chemicals, communication, cable television, water, sewage, drainage (other than those used for highway drainage), irrigation, fire or police signal systems, and similar lines.
Chapter 458
Social and community effects
Transportation projects have both negative and positive effects on public services. Often there are short-term impacts on public services and utilities during construction. In some cases, a project impacts a community’s access to essential services, which may result in equity impacts. Public services and utilities often benefit from transportation projects through improved access or travel time.
458.02 Applicable statutes, regulations, & executive orders 458.02(1)
Federal
• National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 42 USC 4321 and Federal implementing regulations 23 CFR 771 (FHWA) and 40 CFR 1500-1508 (CEQ).
• Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (as amended). See 49 CFR 24 for USDOT implementing regulations.
458.02(2)
State
• State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C. State SEPA Rules are codified in WAC 197-11. WSDOT’s agency SEPA Procedures are in WAC 468-12.
• RCW 8.26 Relocation assistance — real property acquisition policy and WAC 468-100 Uniform relocation assistance and real property acquisition.
• RCW 47.04.280
• WSDOT’s Community Engagement Plan
458.03 Social & community considerations during project development 458.03(1)
Planning
Contact the HQ Multimodal Planning and Data Division for direction.
458.03(2)
Scoping
If the project is scoped as a NEPA EA or EIS, determine the potential impacts to the community through community engagement activities.
458.03(3)
Design
Document your outreach and analysis by following the requirements in section 458.04 below and our agency Community Engagement Plan. Develop a project specific Community Engagement Plan for EA and EIS level projects.
458.03(4)
Construction
Track commitments made to the community to ensure they are carried out.
458.03(5)
Maintenance and Operations
Track commitments made to the community to ensure they are carried out.
Social and community effects
Chapter 458
458.04 Analysis & documentation requirements 458.04(1)
Right size to classification (CE, EA, EIS)
WSDOT’s policy is to follow FHWA guidance relative to Title VI, Environmental Justice, and FHWA’s Technical Advisory T 6640.8A. The Social and Community Effects analysis described in this manual summarizes the TA guidance and examines the effect of transportation improvements on four areas:
• The distribution of benefits and burdens of the project.
• Impacts to the social network.
• Impacts to the local and/or regional economy.
• The effect of residential and commercial relocations. Projects classified as a NEPA Categorical Exclusion are not required to conduct a Social and community effects analysis. EAs and EISs require a Social and community effects analysis. The level of environmental documentation required for a Social and community effects analysis for an EA/EIS can vary greatly depending on the scale of the project, the severity of the potential impacts, and the level of public controversy. In addition, the name used for the analysis should be tailored to your project. For example, some project teams elect to combine socioeconomic or Social and community effects with environmental justice, while others feel the public will prefer to see a separate environmental justice report. While there is flexibility in the format and titles, the methods of analysis and the documentation of conclusions must follow the direction of the federal NEPA Lead and WSDOT policy.
458.04(2)
Analysis & Methodology
Federal The Social and community effects analysis evaluates the transportation project’s impact on the ability of the community to function as a whole. It describes both positive and negative effects. The level of discussion should reflect the severity and extent of the impact. If an analysis is required, focus the analysis on issues of greatest interest to the local community. Use information from the public scoping meetings, interviews with local officials and leaders, and the public involvement process to identify focus areas. At a minimum, the analysis should include a discussion of the following issues for each alternative including the no build:
• Changes in community cohesion (splitting or isolating areas, generating new development, and separation from services).
• Changes in travel patterns, travel time and accessibility for all modes.
• Direct and indirect impacts to social services caused by displacing households (school districts, churches, law enforcement, fire protection, and recreation areas).
• Highway, traffic, bicyclist, and pedestrian safety, and changes in overall public safety.
• Impacts to human health (see 12-Step Social and community Effects Analysis Process).
• Project benefits to the community.
• Project effects on elderly, disabled, and transit dependent populations within the study area.
Chapter 458
Social and community effects
Although some of these elements are measurable and can be drawn directly from analysis of other disciplines (Air, Noise, Transportation, Public Service and Utilities), the analysis requires consideration of the affected community’s perception of the severity of the impacts and proposed mitigation measures. Therefore, the analysis will, by nature, be qualitative and require early, continuous and meaningful engagement with the community. A robust system for recording and tracking issues is essential for project success.
Health Use the Environmental Health Disparities Map (EHD Map) to determine the ‘Environmental Health Disparities’ ranking value for your project area’s Census tract. See our Social & community web page to learn more about using the map. Use the data in the EHD Map to inform your description of the community’s context and help determine the level of community engagement to assess potential impacts from the project. Summarize the negative environmental impacts that are already burdening the community and potential benefits to help inform the Environmental justice analysis (see Chapter 460). Summarize the potential community health benefits associated with the transportation project. Benefits can include improved transit, safer bicycle and pedestrian connections, improved air quality, or anything perceived by the community to improve their quality of life.
Economic effects If economic development is listed as a primary goal in the project purpose and need, the EA or EIS should include the following elements in addition to those listed above.
• Overall effect of the project on the regional economy and compatibility with regional economic development and transportation plans.
• Agreements reached for using the transportation investment to support both public and private economic development plans.
• Opportunities to minimize or reduce impacts on established business districts by private or public means. The environmental document should discuss economic effects if the transportation project is likely to have a substantial adverse effect on a large segment of the economy, or creates land use changes that are not part of an approved local or regional plan. Clearly explain the compatibility of the project with adopted comprehensive plans and coordination with local officials and any impacted business owners. Economic benefits and impacts can include:
• Changes in the type of development and its effect on government revenues and expenditures.
• Changes in employment opportunities.
• Changes in business vitality due to retail sales, changes in access, visibility, or competition from new business development resulting from the project (e.g., development of a new shopping mall at a new interchange location).
• Impacts to existing highway related and drive-by businesses in the study area (such as motels, gas stations and convenience stores). Consult FHWA’s technical advisory (T 6640.8A) and the NCHRP Report 456 - Guidebook for Assessing the Social and Economic Effects of Transportation Projects (Part A) (trb.org).
Social and community effects
Chapter 458
Relocations To evaluate relocation impacts, use the process described in our Right of Way Manual. WSDOT Real Estate Services can develop generalized relocation data for use during the environmental documentation phase of a project. The information is developed by visual inspection of the study area and from readily available secondary and community sources. Generalized data may include:
• An estimate of the number of households to be displaced and family characteristics (minorities, income levels, age, family size and owner/tenant status).
• An estimate of the divisive or disruptive effect of relocations on the community, such as separation of residences from community facilities or separation of neighborhoods.
• An estimate of the impact on the families likely to be displaced.
• An estimate of the number of businesses to be displaced and the general effect of the dislocation on the community’s economy.
• A general description of the housing available for sale in the area and the ability of WSDOT to provide replacement housing for the type of families likely to be displaced.
• A general description of special relocation advisory services that will be necessary for identified unusual conditions.
• A description of the actions proposed to remedy insufficient replacement housing, including housing of last resort.
• A description of the types of transportation (all modes) used by those being relocated to reduce a decrease in their mobility.
• Results of consultation with local officials, social agencies and community groups regarding the impacts on the affected community. Parcel specific information, such as the names and addresses of potential displacements, is not available at this stage of the process and should not be included in the environmental document. However, the Social and community effects analysis must give the number and type of businesses that are impacted and in addition to the race/ethnicity of the business owner and employees. The relocation information should be summarized in sufficient detail to adequately explain the relocation situation, anticipated problems, and proposed solutions. Aerial exhibits showing the relationship of the proposed alignments and proposed right of way boundaries to parcel boundaries clearly identifies possible impacts. A table identifying parcels, value, and generated tax revenue may assist in identifying the magnitude of the impacts. The environmental document must include a statement that:
• The acquisition and relocation program will be conducted in accordance with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended.
• Relocation resources are available to all people being relocated without discrimination in compliance with WSDOT’s Limited English Proficiency Plan. Coordination with local governments, organizations and affected parties to reduce relocation impacts is encouraged by FHWA for large projects with a substantial number of displacements. The environmental document should explain the process used and how affected parties helped develop options to minimize adverse effects in the environmental document.
Chapter 458
Social and community effects
Public services & utilities Under FHWA’s NEPA implementing regulations, impacts to public services and utilities are considered in the Social and community effects analysis. At a minimum the analysis should identify public services and utilities within one‑half mile of the project center line and:
• Document direct impacts due to right of way acquisition.
• Describe anticipated changes in emergency service response times based on changes in travel time or access. Discuss positive and negative effects based on the project’s traffic analysis.
• Determine if the anticipated changes in service demand are consistent with adopted comprehensive plans (for public services and utilities) based on the project’s anticipated residential and/or commercial relocations.
• Describe potential utility relocations (temporary and permanent) for each alternative and their anticipated short-term and long-term impacts.
• Describe how short-term (construction) impacts will be addressed (public outreach, notification of power cuts, detours, delay of emergency response etc.). Both long- and short-term impacts should be considered for all of the alternatives including the no-build. These impacts may include relocation or in place accommodation of utility lines, service outages, or delayed response time of emergency services due to detours. If an EJ population has been identified in the study area, access to public services and utilities should be included in the determination of “disproportionately high and adverse impacts.” WSDOT project environmental documentation and permitting may include an analysis and discussion of utility impacts. Inclusion of the utility in the project permitting documentation avoids delays to the project schedule by eliminating difficulties the utility may encounter when acquiring separate environmental permitting. Utilities Manual Section 600.09(4) provides for guidance, procedure, and a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of including utility relocation impacts in the project’s environmental documentation and permits.
State (No federal nexus) There are no state requirements to conduct a Social and community effects analysis. Under SEPA, impacts to public services and utilities are considered as part of the analysis of a project’s effect on the built environment. RCW 47.04.280 lists Economic vitality as a transportation system goal to, “promote and develop transportation systems that stimulate, support, and enhance the movement of people and goods to ensure a prosperous economy”. State multimodal transportation projects often support planned developments and regional economic strategies.
Social and community effects
Chapter 458
458.05 External engagement Public involvement is a critical element of the Social and community effects analysis that is completed for an EA or EIS. It is used to define the scope of the social analysis, evaluate the effect of alternatives on the community, and develop mitigation. WSDOT’s commitment to inclusive community engagement should be carefully considered during project development. WSDOT’s strategic plan contains policy direction on developing and maintaining stakeholder relationships, both traditional and with under-represented, under-served communities. The goal is to engage stakeholders before, during and after projects, and in general outreach. More than any other discipline, the social analysis relies on interaction with the affected communities. The analysis should focus on issues of the most concern to the people who live, work, and play in the vicinity of the project. Public outreach can be used to:
• Collect descriptive information about the community.
• Identify key issues for analysis to support scope and budget decisions.
• Communicate WSDOT proposed efforts to avoid and minimize adverse effect and collect public perception of a project’s impact (or lack of impact) to the social network.
• Collect public input on project design and mitigation and demonstrate WSDOT response to community concerns.
• Demonstrate and document compliance with Federal requirements for public input into the decision making process. WSDOT policy requires staff to follow the Model Comprehensive Tribal Consultation Process when working with tribal governments. See Chapters 400 and 530 for more information on Tribal Coordination. Contact the WSDOT Tribal Liaison Office for assistance. Refer to our Community Engagement Plan (PDF 2.1MB) for engagement best practices.
458.06 Internal Roles and responsibilities Roles and responsibilities in this subject area overlap with those in several other subject areas depending on the specifics of the proposed project.
458.06(1)
Project Engineer
Identify local leaders and stakeholders to engage in the project development process and work with project Communicator to identify additional interested or affected parties. The WSDOT LEP Plan requires project managers to:
• Make every effort to provide services, either through translation or interpreter, prior to scheduled meetings, such as public hearings, or project meetings.
• Pay for the translation of vital documents and interpreter services including summary newsletters, brochures, public notices for meetings and summary documents for open houses or environmental hearings. Interpreter services should be provided upon request for open houses and hearings.
Chapter 458
Social and community effects
458.06(2)
Environmental Coordinator / Consultant
Conduct the Social and community effects analysis.
458.06(3)
Communicator
Work with the Project Engineer to develop community engagement strategies and a projectspecific community engagement plan, if needed.
458.06(4)
WSDOT HQ Environmental Services Office
Review the Social and community effects analysis.
458.07 Mitigation WSDOT uses community input when considering appropriate mitigation measures to address the transportation impacts as required by Federal and State laws. The project team then pursues and negotiates reasonable project related mitigation in good faith with the community. NEPA, SEPA, the federal Environmental Justice Executive Order and the Secretary’s Executive Order (E 1018.03) all provide policy direction that support mitigating project impacts – this includes mitigating impacts to the human environment (community mitigation) in addition to the natural environment.
458.08 Applicable permits & approval process There are no associated permits or approvals associated with Social and community effects.
458.09 Abbreviations and acronyms Abbreviations and acronyms used in this chapter are listed below.
ADA
Americans with Disabilities Act
CEP
Community Engagement Plan
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations
EA
Environmental Assessment
EIS
Environmental Impact Statement
FHWA
Federal Highway Administration
RCW
Revised Code of Washington
Title VI
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
WAC
Washington Administrative Code
Social and community effects
Chapter 458
458.10 Glossary Community Cohesion – The ability of people to communicate and interact with each other in ways that lead to a sense of community, as reflected in the neighborhood’s ability to function and be recognized as a singular unit. Public Service – Public services include, schools, churches, community centers, day care facilities, hospitals, nursing homes, medical and dental clinics, fire stations, police stations, cemeteries, and social service providers. Utility – Privately publicly, or cooperatively owned lines, facilities, and systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communications, cable television, electric power, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water, steam, waste, stormwater not connected with highway drainage, and other similar commodities, including fire or police signal systems, street lighting systems, and traffic control systems which directly or indirectly serve the public. See Utilities Manual Chapter 2. Utility Relocation – The adjustment or replacement of utility facilities required by a highway project, including removing and installing facilities, acquiring necessary property rights in the new location, moving or rearranging existing facilities, or changing the type of facility to provide any necessary safety and protective measures. See WSDOT Utilities Accommodation Policy M 22-86. Relocation Assistance – When the acquisition of right of way requires the displacement of any family, individual, farm, business, nonprofit organization, or their personal property, that party or organization may be entitled to payments, separate and distinct from the acquisition compensation, in order to alleviate the costs of moving and replacement housing. Such payments and matters pertaining to eligibility are the subject of See Chapter 12 of the Right of Way Manual M 26-01.
Chapter 458
Social and community effects
This page intentionally left blank.
Chapter 459 459.01 459.02 459.03 459.04 459.05 459.06 459.07 459.08 459.09 459.10
Visual impacts
Introduction Applicable statutes, regulations, executive orders, & agreements Considerations during project development Analysis & documentation requirements External involvement Internal roles & responsibilities Applicable permits and approvals Mitigation Abbreviations and acronyms Glossary
459.01 Introduction Most people primarily experience their environment through visual cues, so visual perception is an important topic when analyzing environmental quality. Highway projects can impact visual quality through changes to the relationship between people and their surrounding physical environment. Public concern over adverse visual impacts could be a major source of project opposition, so evaluating and openly communicating changes with the affected population is very important to a project’s success. The location, design, and maintenance of highway, ferry, rail, and aviation facilities may adversely or positively affect the visual features of the landscape that are experienced by people. This chapter focuses on highway projects, but the same, or similar, requirements apply to other transportation modes and facilities (see Section 459.02). Because of the public nature and visual importance of transportation projects, both negative and positive visual impacts must be adequately assessed and considered during project development. Understanding the sensitivity of viewer groups is as important as understanding the physical environment and the proposed project actions. In discussing and reviewing the visual impacts of a highway project, the Landscape Architect should consider both the view from the road and the view toward the road. Research has shown that the view from the road is the basis for much of what people know about the everyday environment and their mental image of their surroundings. Visual cues can also contribute to traffic calming and stress reduction for motorists. However, the project should balance the desire for pleasing vistas for travelers with protecting views from surrounding homes or vantage points. The designer must carefully plan to ensure the facility blends into the community and its environment. (For related information on historic and cultural resources, (see Chapter 456).
459.02 Applicable statutes, regulations, executive orders, & agreements 459.02(1)
Federal
• National Environmental Policy Act – The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 42 USC 4321, Section 101(b)(2) states that it is the “continuous responsibility” of the federal government to “use all practicable means” to “assure for all Americans safe, healthful, productive, and esthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings.” For details on NEPA procedures (see Chapters 400 and 412). 
Chapter 459
Visual impacts
Federal implementing regulations are at 23 CFR 771 (FHWA) and 40 CFR 15001508. According to the Council on Environmental Quality implementing regulations, environmental analysis is to consider impacts on urban quality, historic and cultural resources, and the design of the built environment” (Section 1502.6). Agencies shall “identify methods and procedures . . . to insure that presently unquantified environmental amenities and values may be given appropriate consideration” (Section 1507.2).
• Highway Beautification Act – The Highway Beautification Act of 1965 was enacted to provide effective control of outdoor advertising and junkyards, protect public investment, promote the safety and recreational value of public travel, and preserve natural beauty, and provide landscapes and roadside development reasonably necessary to accommodate the traveling public. Implementing procedures are set forth in 23 CFR 750, 751, and 752.
• National Historic Preservation Act – Implementing regulations for Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (see Section 456.02), adopted in 1976, define criteria of adverse effect (36 CFR 800.5) to include the “introduction of visual, atmospheric, or audible elements that diminish the integrity of the property’s significant historic features.”
• DOT Act, Section 4(f) – This act declares a national policy to make a special effort to preserve the natural beauty of the countryside and public park and recreation sites, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and historic sites.” For details on Section 4(f) see Chapters 400, 455, and 457.
• Wild and Scenic Rivers Act – This act, as amended, directs that “each component of the national wild and scenic rivers system shall be administered in such manner as to protect and enhance the values which caused it to be included, without, insofar as it is consistent therewith, limiting other uses that do not substantially interfere with public use and enjoyment of these values. In such administration, primary emphasis shall be given to protecting its esthetic, scenic, historic, archaeological, and scientific features.” For information on wild and scenic rivers in Washington (see Chapter 455).
459.02(2)
State
• State Environmental Policy Act – The State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), requires that all major actions sponsored, funded, permitted, or approved by state and/or local agencies undergo planning to ensure environmental considerations such as impacts related to aesthetics and visual quality are given due weight in decision making. State implementing regulations are in WAC 197-11 and WAC 468-12.
• Highway Beautification Act – Washington’s Highway Beautification Act (RCW 47.40.010), adopted in 1961, declared improvement and beautification of any state highway right of way to be a “proper highway purpose.” The act specifically mentions the following improvements: “planting and cultivating of any shrubs, trees, hedges or other domestic or native ornamental growth; the improvement of roadside facilities and viewpoints; and the correction of unsightly conditions.”
• Open Space Land Preservation – In RCW 84.34, the legislature declared that “it is in the best interest of the state to maintain, preserve, conserve and otherwise continue in existence adequate open space lands for the production of food, fiber and forest crops, and to assure the use and enjoyment of natural resources and scenic beauty for the economic and social well-being of the state and its citizens.” Open space was defined as including any land area that would preserve visual quality along highway, road, and street corridors or scenic vistas. One of the criteria to be used in determining open space classification for current use or conservation futures is whether granting this classification would preserve visual quality along highway, road, and street corridors or scenic vistas (RCW 84.34.037).
Visual impacts
Chapter 459
459.03 Considerations during project development A Visual Impact Assessment (VIA) is intended to provide decision makers with information on both the positive and negative visual quality impacts that may result from a project. The assessment, along with mitigation recommendations, provides designers with information on minimizing negative impacts on visual quality, and concepts to enhance existing visual quality and community aesthetics within the scope of the project.
459.03(1)
Planning
Complex or controversial projects that may trigger the need for a more thorough evaluation should consider the public involvement approach to help define visual quality within the area of visual effect. The public involvement approach is explained in Section 5.4 Visual Quality, Guidelines for the Visual Impact Assessment of Highway Projects (FHWA, 2015). Information about visual preferences gathered from public workshops will provide the VIA author important information to better understand what the public values visually within the project corridor.
459.03(2)
Scoping
A project’s scoping document defines the geographic extent of the project. It also establishes the topics explored in the project’s environmental review process. Preparers should participate in the scoping process, both to inform the scope of the project and to better understand the scope of the anticipated VIA and use the findings of the scoping document and any public scoping comments for an initial understanding of anticipated impacts on visual resources or viewers. Public scoping comments may identify visual resources that neighbors consider essential to the visual identity of their community, or it may identify visual resources that travelers consider essential to their traveling experience.
459.03(3)
Design
Conceptual design studies and preliminary design plans illustrate the proposed project and help to identify potential impacts to visual resources and viewers. The level of detail available during the early stages of the design will vary and can include the area of potential effect to alternative alignments, the number of lanes, the location of intersections and interchanges, and the potential for bridges, retaining walls, and other structures. In addition to providing a rough understanding of the visual character of the proposed project, early studies and plans often include features proposed for demolition, vegetation removal limits, existing and proposed grading, and other proposed project features. Authors should use these early studies and plans to understand the extent to which existing features would be removed and where new or modified landforms, pavement, structures, or utilities would occur. Sometimes these early studies and plans even include proposed aesthetic design treatments, such as ornamental lighting or architectural enhancements, included in the project to mitigate adverse impacts.
459.03(4)
Construction
Construction timing (time of year, duration, phasing, and nighttime construction activities), methods of construction, equipment needed, even erosion control or re-vegetation measures, if known, may be useful background information for the VIA author.
Chapter 459
Visual impacts
After Design, Construction carries out the mitigation strategies that address visual impacts resulting from a project. It is important to ensure that the Project delivers these mitigation strategies and carefully manage any proposed changes that come via Design-Bid-Build or Design-Build Contracts. Design Build is a method of project delivery in which WSDOT executes a single contract with one entity (the Design-Builder) for design and construction services to provide a finished product. Design-Bid-Build is the traditional form of project delivery in which WSDOT provides the complete design documents and the Contractor builds the design after the bidding process. Changes during construction for Design-Bid-Build are in the form of change orders where modifications to the agreed upon work is documented. Design changes may occur during the design build process as well. It is important to communicate what these changes are and how these changes may effect what was originally assessed in the VIA. For example, when an Alternative Technical Concept is proposed, decision makers should consider the visual aspects of the change and understand how the visible change(s) would affect sensitive viewer groups or views toward sensitive resources.
459.03(5)
Maintenance and Operations
During the preliminary design phase of a project, many design features that will affect visual resources, viewers, and visual quality are being determined. Mitigation measures and opportunities for enhancement are also likely to have been introduced. Visual impacts caused by operations and maintenance activities that will affect the project design, mitigation, or enhancement elements will need to be assessed to confirm that these design features, which may be critical to the public’s acceptance of a project, remain effective indefinitely. Operational features that may affect visual quality include functional and ornamental lighting in the corridor, vehicular headlights, changeable message signs, vegetation removal, and glare from reflective materials. Maintena