racking or pavement repair to fix deeper structural problems.
31
WSDOT Pavement Policy
32
WSDOT Pavement Policy
7. PAVEMENT PRESERVATION Pavement preservation extends the service life of an existing pavement.
The pavement
preservation strategy selected should extend the pavement service life at the lowest life cycle cost. The pavement preservation strategy selected depends on the type of pavement (chip seal, HMA or PCCP) and the pavement condition. Roadways with annual average daily traffic (AADT) less than 10,000 are designated chip seal routes and preservation of these routes should follow Section 7.1 Chip Seals. Exceptions (such as paving through urban areas, intersections with a significant number of turning movements, locations with limited chip seal use, etc.) to this policy are evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The AADT criterion of 10,000 does not imply that chip seals cannot or should not be placed on higher AADT routes. If the Region requests placing a chip seal on a higher volume HMA route, the request shall be made based on a pavement analysis and documented in the Regions Pavement Design Report. HMA and PCCP routes will be preserved with the same pavement type as the existing pavement. Approval for application of chip seals on routes with AADT greater than 10,000 and other exceptions requires approval from the State Pavement Engineer. The primary method of preserving HMA routes is a thin HMA inlay or overlay.
Preservation
treatments such as crack sealing, patching and chip sealing should be used to extend the time between thin inlays/overlays on all HMA routes.
7.1
CHIP SEALS
Chip seals are an effective method of preserving pavements on low volume roadways at a low life cycle cost. In order to realize the low life cycle cost of a chip seal, work performed to correct deficiencies in the existing pavement needs to be kept to the minimum required to provide serviceable pavement over the life of the chip seal.
33
WSDOT Pavement Policy 7.1.1
PAVEMENT DESIGN
The design period for a chip seal is typically six to eight years. Regions may use any design method that gives acceptable results. Chip seal types other than those provided in Section 5-02 of the Standard Specifications must be approved through the State Pavement Office. 7.1.2
PREPARATION OF EXISTING PAVEMENT
Deficiencies in the existing pavement that may affect the performance of the chip seal will need to be corrected prior to placing the chip seal. Corrective work should be limited to that necessary to preserve the roadway and provide a serviceable pavement for the life of the chip seal. 7.1.2.1
Prelevel
The use of prelevel prior to placement of a chip seal is limited strictly to spot improvements such as broken shoulders or distressed pavement and is limited to 70 tons of HMA per lane mile. Increased prelevel quantities require approval by the State Pavement Office. Reasons for the increased prelevel quantities include: 1. Removal of hazardous “spot” locations, e.g., ponding areas or to restore proper pavement drainage at a specific location. 2. Correction of deficient superelevation or cross slope when the deficiency is the cause of operational problems as determined from an accident history analysis. 3. Pavement rutting specifically identified (rutting greater than ⅜ inch). When any prelevel is warranted it must be clearly documented in the pavement design and carefully detailed in the contract PS&E so that the use is clearly apparent to the contractor and the construction Project Engineer. 7.1.2.2
Pavement Repair
Pavement repair on chip seal projects should address areas of load related failure of the existing pavement such as depressed alligator cracked areas. Pavement repair depth should be kept to the minimum required to restore the load carrying capacity of the pavement. 7.1.2.3
Crack Sealing
Chip seal performance can be enhanced by sealing cracks prior to the chip seal application. Where hot poured crack sealing products have been used, cracking has been delayed and, in some cases, eliminated thus extending the life of the chip seal. Hot poured products are typically 
34
WSDOT Pavement Policy used for cracks between ¼ and 1 inch in width. Sand slurry emulsions are typically more economical for crack widths one inch or greater. There are proprietary products that are effective on very wide cracks. Minor cracks will be addressed by the application of emulsified asphalt during placement of the chip seal. Cracks on chip seal routes should be sealed one year in advance of the chip seal placement to allow crack sealing materials to cure. 7.1.3
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
7.1.3.1
Mainline Shoulders
Shoulders on chip seal roadways do not require treatment as often as the pavement in the travel lane. Shoulders shall only receive a chip seal if warranted by pavement condition. 7.1.3.2
Recessed Lane Markers and Rumble Strips
Evaluate the existing pavement thickness and condition to determine if rumble strips can be installed on chip seal roadways without causing premature damage to the pavement. If recessed lane markers or rumble strips are used, the existing chip seal surfacing should have a minimum thickness of 0.25 ft., which can include any combinations of chip seal and HMA applications. Grinding rumble strips on chip seal roadways exposes the previous chip seal layers. Exposure to moisture accumulation and freezing and thawing often leads to delamination. To reduce the possibility of delamination at rumble strip locations, rumble strips shall be ground prior to the chip seal application. Roadways to receive subsequent chip seals shall be evaluated to determine if the depth of the remaining rumble strips are adequate to allow an additional chip seal.
Previous WSDOT
experience has shown that a chip seal can be placed over existing rumble strips once and still be effective. Where rumble strips need to be reground, preleveling may be required to remove distressed pavement and provide sufficient pavement structure. 7.1.3.3
Chip Seals over New HMA Overlays
Chip seal need is generally triggered by one of three conditions:
•
Friction: Where a chip seal is placed for friction purposes, the need shall be clearly substantiated by the Region Materials Engineer with supporting friction data;
•
Surface Distress: For routes with surface distress as determined by the WSPMS; and
35
WSDOT Pavement Policy
•
New HMA: There is strong evidence that application of a chip seal over a new HMA overlay reduces the aging of the HMA binder which reduces top down cracking. This practice of placing a chip seal on HMA within one year following construction of the HMA overlay has been examined by WSDOT with positive findings.
7.2
HOT MIX ASPHALT
Pavement with relatively thin HMA layers (less than six inches) tend to crack from the bottom up requiring replacement of the entire HMA layer at the end of the pavement’s life. WSDOT has found that cracking in HMA pavement layers thicker than six inches tends to be from the top of the pavement layer down. Since bottom up cracking is minimal, preservation of these thicker HMA sections involves correcting the top down cracking and other surface distresses leaving the underlying pavement structure intact. If properly maintained the underlying pavement structure can last 50 years or more resulting in a low life cycle cost. HMA preservation should focus on preserving this underlying pavement structure. 7.2.1
PAVEMENT DESIGN
HMA preservation is intended to be non-structural by only replacing the top layer of HMA to remove aged related top-down surface cracking.
The thickness of these inlays will be the
minimum depth required to remove the majority of the top-down cracking. If additional structure is required, HMA overlay design can be accomplished either by use of the mechanistic-empirical based scheme used in the Everpave© computer program or the AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures (1993), Part III, Chapter 5. The Everpave© program is for use with HMA pavements. The AASHTO procedure can be applied to either HMA or PCCP structures. The design period for HMA preservation thickness design for thin inlays/overlays is 15 years. The Roadway Paving Program cost estimate is based on a pavement inlay depth of 0.15 foot. The required depth for an HMA inlay shall be as noted in the Pavement Design Report. Every effort should be made to keep inlays to the 0.15 foot depth; however, in some cases this may not be possible due to existing structural conditions. Pavement designs greater than 0.15 feet require a detailed analysis, including a pavement design, justifying the increase in thickness. 7.2.1.1
Granular Overlays (Cushion Courses)
The granular overlay system (often referred to as a "cushion course") is an alternative type of overlay for rehabilitating mostly low volume, rural roads (this does not necessarily imply a low 
36
WSDOT Pavement Policy number of ESALs). The overlay consists of a layer of densely compacted, crushed rock (CSBC) overlain by a generally thin surface layer. The surfacing depth can vary depending on local conditions and requirements; however, the CSBC depth shall not exceed 0.50 feet in order to achieve the maximum structural benefit due to stress stiffening. 7.2.1.2
Subgrade Soils
Subgrade soil resilient modulus for thin (0.15’ or less) overlays or inlays can be obtained from existing soil data or a cursory evaluation of soil conditions. When thicker sections are called for to increase pavement structure, additional soils investigation or deflection survey should be conducted to validate the need for additional structure. The State Pavement Office performs a pavement deflection survey on selected projects. This survey shall be conducted before the Pavement Design Report to aid the Region Materials Engineer with coring and sampling of each project. The deflection survey shall be conducted, when possible, either in late fall or early spring. The Region Materials Engineer shall coordinate with the State Pavement Office so that most of the deflection surveys are conducted during one time period each year. After conducting the deflection surveys, the State Pavement Office will report the results of the survey to the Region Materials Engineer. 7.2.2
PREPARATION OF EXISTING PAVEMENT
For an HMA thin inlay/overlay to perform well, specific distresses in the existing pavement need to be corrected. There may be multiple methods to address a distressed pavement dependant on the type and severity of distress. For example, cracking can be repaired by full depth pavement repair or planing depending on the depth of the cracking. Various distress repair and overlay strategies should be evaluated to determine which is most cost effective. 7.2.2.1
Prelevel
The use of prelevel prior to placement of an overlay is strictly limited to the correction of safety related deficiencies unless otherwise stated in the Pavement Design Report. Safety-related uses of prelevel are as follows:
•
To remove hazardous “spot” locations, e.g., ponding areas or to restore proper pavement drainage at a specific location.
•
To correct deficient superelevation or cross slope when the deficiency is the cause of operational problems as determined from an accident history analysis.
37
WSDOT Pavement Policy
•
To address pavement rutting specifically identified in the Pavement Design (rutting of less than ⅜ inch will generally be addressed with the overlay).
A shallow grind, with a depth equal to the depth of the ruts is an alternative to prelevel. The cost of grinding versus prelevel should be evaluated when prelevel is needed. When prelevel is warranted as outlined above, it must be clearly documented in the pavement design and carefully detailed in the contract PS&E so that the use is clearly apparent to the contractor and the construction Project Engineer. 7.2.2.2
Crack Sealing
The item “crack sealing” will only be used when specified in the Pavement Design Report. Crack sealing will be done only on cracks ¼ inch and wider, see Standard Specification 5-04.3(4)A. Minor cracks will be addressed by the use of tack coat. Use sand slurry to fill cracks wider than 1 inch and all cracks in areas to be overlaid with HMA. Hot poured products should be used for cracks between ¼ and 1 inch in width in areas that will not be paved. Sand slurry emulsions are typically more economical for filling cracks one inch or greater. 7.2.2.3
Pavement Repair
As WSDOT’s HMA pavements become thicker, due to successive overlays, failures tend to be limited to the surface course. Distress in thicker HMA pavements (generally greater than six inches) typically occurs as top down cracking. Top down cracks often penetrate only the wearing surface of a roadway and do not affect the aggregate base or subgrade. Options for rehabilitating pavements with top down cracking include planing and inlaying or overlaying depending upon the extent and depth of the distress. In most cases, pavement coring will identify the depth of the required pavement repair. Thinner pavements (generally less than six inches) can experience distress throughout the HMA thickness and sometimes into the aggregate base and subgrade. In these cases, full depth replacement of the HMA may be warranted, however, the repair of the pavement failures can range from removing the entire pavement section to only the depth of the last overlay. Coring shall be performed to determine the depth of required repair. Depending on the distress, removal and replacement of aggregate base and subgrade may be necessary. It is important that the Project Offices work closely with the Region Materials Office to determine the cause and extent of the pavement failures. 
38
WSDOT Pavement Policy While pavement repair is preferred to totally remove the distressed pavement, increasing the overlay depth in localized areas can also be considered if conditions warrant. The additional cost of the overlay, however, shall be compared to the cost of providing pavement repair. 7.2.3
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
7.2.3.1
Mainline Thin Mill and Fill Preservation
Pavement preservation that requires the milling of mainline and inlaying the milled thickness with HMA should extend a minimum of 0.5 foot (preferably a foot) into the shoulder. The extension of the milling into the shoulder moves the resulting longitudinal joint away from traffic and extends pavement life. If rumble strips are distressed, extend the milling to include the rumble strip. A major advantage of a mill and fill versus an overlay is that a mill and fill allows paving of only the lanes needing immediate preservation. An overlay requires paving of the full width of the roadway regardless of condition often resulting in overlaying of pavement which is not currently in need of preservation.
In order to minimize cost, inlay only lanes presently in need of
preservation on multilane roadways. Similarly, only mill and fill turn lanes, parking strips and shoulders if warranted by the pavement condition. 7.2.3.2
Mainline Shoulders
Mainline shoulders will generally require a thin inlay/overlay every other rehabilitation cycle. When shoulders do require treatment, it is often only the portion nearest the travel lane that needs preservation. In these cases, only paving a four or five foot strip nearest fog stripe should be considered. 7.2.3.3
Fog Sealing
Shoulders shall be fog sealed based on the Region Materials Office recommendations. Lanes paved with dense graded HMA are typically not fog sealed unless an open texture forms shortly after construction. Fog seals to address this issue have been shown to be effective in helping to reduce the excessive surface voids. 7.2.3.4
Pavement Markings, Recessed Lane Markers and Rumble Strips
Recessed lane markers, methyl methacrylate striping, thermoplastic stop bars, arrows, or other coated materials shall be removed prior to placement of the HMA overlay.
39
WSDOT Pavement Policy Rumble strips on shoulders may be overlaid with a minimum depth of 0.15 feet HMA as long as there is no shift in the existing lane configuration that will cause the wheel path to cross over the underlying rumble strips. If this is the case, reflection of the underlying rumble strip will occur. On HMA inlay projects where the rumble strips need replacement, the width of the inlay can be increased outside of the fog line to include the rumble strip area. Rumble strips on shoulders that will carry traffic as a detour shall be preleveled or ground and inlayed with a minimum depth of 0.15 feet HMA. A typical option is to plane and inlay a three foot width from the fog line towards the shoulder edge. Rumble strips located between directional traffic shall be preleveled or removed by planing and inlaying. The centerline joint should be offset so that the rumble strips are not ground into the lower density HMA near the joint where practical. HMA shoulders shall be compacted to the same requirements as the traveled lanes per WSDOT Standard Specification 5-04.3(10) where freeze thaw, heavy moisture or chronic rumble strip distress is present. 7.2.3.5
Increased Milling Depth for Delaminations
Pavement thicknesses shall not be arbitrarily increased based on perceived concerns that the underlying layers will delaminate on a rotomill and inlay project. A thicker lift can be approved, however, cores obtained at a minimum of 0.25 mile intervals must substantiate that a delaminated layer exists. 7.2.3.6
Tack Coat
A tack coat is required between all HMA layers (new construction and overlay). 7.2.3.7
Correcting Shoulder Slopes
Roadways with a 0.02 ft./ft. cross slope on the lanes and 0.05 ft./ft. on the shoulders may be corrected provided the shoulder width is four feet or less. On roadways with shoulders wider than four feet, the correction will be deferred depending on funding. 7.2.3.8
Removal of Open Graded Pavements Prior to Overlays
Open-graded pavements shall be removed prior to overlaying with dense-graded HMA. Removal of the open-graded asphalt layer is necessary to avoid stripping of the open-graded layer once a 
40
WSDOT Pavement Policy new layer of HMA is placed. On lower volume roadways, cold in-place recycling of an OGEAP layer is an acceptable rehabilitation alternative. On planing and inlay projects, where only the travelled lanes are preserved, open-graded pavements may remain on the shoulders for many thin inlay/overlay cycles. However, where there is potential for the existing shoulder to become a travelled lane, the open-graded asphalt layer shall be removed prior to any future overlays. 7.2.3.9
HMA Surfaced Bridge Decks
Most bridges with existing HMA surfaces should be paved at the same time as the adjacent roadway. Even if the HMA on the bridge is in relatively good condition, it is often more cost effective to pave the bridge at the same time as the roadway rather than to pave it later under a standalone project. Removal of some of the existing HMA prior to paving may be necessary to prevent excess dead load caused by the build-up of HMA layers. To ensure adequate compaction, paving depths should follow the minimum provided in Section 8.2.3. See the Bridge Condition Report or contact the Bridge and Structures Office for specific milling and overlay depth requirements.
7.3
PCCP
Dowel bar retrofit, localized panel replacements (as necessary) and diamond grinding have proven to be effective PCCP preservation methods in Washington State. These preservation options restore transverse joint load transfer, replace PCCP panels that have a high risk of failure, and provide a smooth driving surface. Preservation of PCCP is limited to dowel bar retrofits, diamond grinding and replacing distressed panels.
HMA overlays without pre-treating the existing PCCP are susceptible to reflection
cracking and are not an approved method of rehabilitating PCCP. Dowel bar retrofits can be effective since WSDOT did not place dowels in PCCP up until 1993. Dowel bars placed in the wheel paths have been shown to significantly restore load transfer and hence reduce reoccurring faulting. Dowel bar retrofits can be expected to perform adequately for about 10 to 15 years. Following this, it is common WSDOT experience to observe accelerated slab deterioration.
41
WSDOT Pavement Policy 7.3.1
PAVEMENT DESIGN
PCCP preservation does not increase the structural load carrying capacity of the pavement (other than to improve load transfer across joints) so no specific thickness design requirements apply. 7.3.2
DISTRESS CORRECTION
The focus of PCCP preservation is to correct specific pavement distress and thus extend the life of the pavement and improve serviceability. 7.3.2.1
Faulting/Load Transfer
Improvement of load transfer should be accomplished by retrofitting the pavement with dowel bars. Ideal candidate projects for dowel bar retrofitting are those PCCP roadways that are 25 to 35 years old and have fault measurements less than ⅛ inch. Pavements that are 35 years or older and have faulting greater than ½ inch shall be considered for diamond grinding only without dowel bar retrofitting. 7.3.2.2
Panel Replacements
Panels cracked into three or more pieces or settled by more than ½ inch should be replaced. The minimum panel replacement length is 6 feet. The replacement panel thickness generally matches the existing pavement. Thicker replacement panels require approval by the State Pavement Office.
WSDOT’s Panel Replacement Criteria for PCCP Rehabilitation provides additional
information on selecting panels for replacement. 7.3.2.3
Diamond Grinding
Roughness caused by studded tires or faulting should be corrected by diamond grinding. Make the final pass of grinding parallel to the direction of travel for the completed project. Contractors have requested additional compensation on several projects based on the ruts in the field being deeper than the rut depths indicated in the contract. When PCCP grinding is required, there needs to be a method for the contractor to assess the rut depth accurately. One method that appears to have been successful on several projects is to provide a time when the contractors can access the site during lane closures. The accuracy of rut depth data collected by the State Pavement Office is only sufficient for system wide analysis and is not accurate enough for bidding purposes. If rut depth data collected by the
42
WSDOT Pavement Policy State Pavement Office is provided to the contractor, it must be made clear the data is for information only. 7.3.2.4
Shoulders
Shoulders should be evaluated for preservation at the time of PCCP preservation. Diamond grinding of the adjacent PCCP often requires the grinding of existing shoulder to prevent leaving a vertical edge between the lane and shoulder. 7.3.2.5
Hot Mix Asphalt Overlays of PCCP
Overlaying HMA on PCCP includes a range of rehabilitation strategies that must be considered including the condition of the existing PCCP and whether the PCCP is doweled or non-doweled. Non-Doweled PCCP: HMA overlays without pre-treating the existing PCCP are susceptible to reflection cracking and are not an approved method of rehabilitating PCCP. Pre-treatment of nondoweled pavement may consist of panel replacements, dowel bar retrofitting or a combination of both. In some instances, cracking and seating and overlaying may be a suitable option. Doweled PCCP: Diamond grinding can become problematic for PCCP with dowels as each successive diamond grind reduces concrete cover above the dowels. PCCP with less than three inches of concrete cover over the dowel bars should not be ground. Overlaying doweled PCCP with HMA requires approval from the State Pavement Office. Normally non-doweled pavements will require a thicker overlay as compared to doweled pavements.
In either case, overlaying PCCP with HMA requires approval from the State
Pavement Office.
7.4
OTHER PAVEMENT PRESERVATION TREATMENTS
The bulk of WSDOT flexible pavement preservation consists of single chip seals and HMA inlays. These strategies have proven to be a cost effective means to preserve highways in Washington State. However, other preservation treatments are used to successfully preserve pavements. These treatments may be considered when selecting a preservation treatment. The Table 7.1 details the applicability of some of these treatments:
43
WSDOT Pavement Policy Table 7.1 Applicability of Preservation Treatments Treatment Option
Distress Corrected
Traffic Limitations
Other
Hot Chip Seal
Chip seal projects where time to open to traffic or loose chips is a factor
Same as chip seal
Lane closures, can be opened to traffic sooner than a conventional chip seal
Reduces the amount of loose chips and dust
Double Chip Seal
Flushed roadways or where a more durable chip seal is needed
Same as chip seal
Same as chip seal
Two chip sizes are often used
Lengthy lane closures required during paving
Best suited for roadways without sharp curves, few side roads or driveways and few overhead utilities, not suitable for wearing surface
Hot In-Place Recycling
7.4.1
Candidate Pavement
HMA pavements that do not have deep failure or materials problems
Surface cracking, ravelling
HOT CHIP SEALS
Hot chip seals consist of an application of asphalt binder followed by application of aggregate similar to a standard chip seal. Unlike a standard chip seal, the aggregate is pre-coated with asphalt at an asphalt plant before it is placed on the roadway. Pre-coating the chips improves the binding to the roadway and reduces dust allowing the roadway to be opened to traffic sooner than a conventional chip seal. A hot chip seal should be considered on higher volume roadways to allow earlier opening to traffic without excessive loose chips. 7.4.2
DOUBLE CHIP SEAL
A double chip seal is essentially two single chip seals, one placed on top of the other. The chip size of the second application is often smaller than the first allowing for improved “key in” of the chips. WSDOT has successfully constructed a double chip seal using the same aggregate for both applications. Double chip seals are often used where damage by truck traffic is an issue. 7.4.3
HOT IN-PLACE RECYCLING
Hot in-place recycling (HIR) employs a train of specialized equipment to remove, process and repave the existing pavement in one pass.
The HIR recycling train is slower and less
manoeuvrable than conventional paving equipment. Roadways with sharp curves or many side 
44
WSDOT Pavement Policy streets and driveways that must be kept open to traffic may not be good candidates for HIR. The HIR equipment also needs sufficient space off the roadway at about one to two mile intervals to park the HIR equipment between shifts. HIR is capable of recycling the top two inches of the pavement at a constant width of about 12 feet. The constant width makes it difficult to use HIR on wider travel lanes or roadways where there are many turn lanes that require preservation. The addition of recycling agents and aggregate allow some improvement of the recycled HMA but existing pavement with severe materials problems like stripping should be avoided. Paving fabrics and an excess of rubberized crack sealers can also be problematic.
HIR can be
considered as an alternate to an inlay where the roadway geometrics are compatible with the HIR equipment. HIR is susceptible to ravelling and is not suitable for use as a final wearing surface. A surface treatment or HMA overlay is required to be placed over all HIR pavements.
7.5.
STRATEGIC MAINTENANCE
Preventive Preservation is anticipated, planned work designed to extend the service life of a roadway one to six years and to maximize the time between pavement preservation treatments. WSDOT Maintenance personnel usually perform preventive preservation work but the work can be performed under contract. The goals of preventive preservations include:
•
Maintain serviceability
•
Extend pavement life
•
Lower the life cycle cost of the pavement
7.5.1
CHIP SEALS
Due to their relatively short service life, preventive preservation of chip seal surfaced roadways should kept to a minimum to maintain serviceability and hold the pavement in its present condition until the next chip seal. Since chip seals are a form of Preventive Preservation treatment, using an early seal coat treatment to slow deterioration is not practical. Crack sealing is a good choice of preservation treatment for a chip seal because the crack sealing can be incorporated into a future chip seal. If the sealant is still in good condition, the new chip seal can be placed over the sealed cracks eliminating the need to seal the cracks as part of the chip seal project. Patching may be required for areas with delamination, depressions in the roadway, shoving or flushing since these types of distress may indicate a deeper failure.
45
WSDOT Pavement Policy 7.5.2
HOT MIX ASPHALT
Hot mix asphalt can benefit from both early preventive preservation to slow deterioration and repairing the worst areas to extend pavement life. Placing a seal coat to slow down asphalt binder aging over the HMA before significant distress has occurred will help slow deterioration. The seal coat protects the HMA surface from the environment and slows the asphalt binder aging process delaying the onset of cracking. There has been limited use of early seal coats on HMA pavement in Washington but it is standard practice in some states. WSDOT conducted an extensive long-term Preventive Maintenance Study of using preservation treatments to repair distressed areas of HMA pavements to extend pavement life (Anderson et al.). The study looked at crack sealing, chip sealing, patching and thin overlays to preserve roadways that were at or near the due date for rehabilitation. All treatment types extended pavement life provided the treatment was appropriate for the distress and was performed at the right time. The result of this study indicate that selective preventive preservation is able to cost effectively extend pavement life. To take advantage of the saving, WSDOT has implemented a policy to require at least one application of preventive preservation before programming a capital preservation project. 7.5.3
PCCP
Preventive preservation of PCCP involves diamond grinding, dowel bar retrofitting, and repairing cracked or spalled PCCP panels. The scale and equipment required for dowel bar retrofits and PCCP grinding projects limits this type of work to capital preservation projects. When panel replacement and spall repair can extent pavement life, Preventive Preservation by WSDOT Maintenance can be cost effective.
7.6.
SKID COLLISION REDUCTION POLICY
Friction is an important pavement characteristic. In addition to structure, ride and rutting, friction must be addressed to preserve a pavement’s serviceability. WSDOT’s Skid Collision Reduction Policy is described in detail in the following sections.
46
WSDOT Pavement Policy 7.6.1
SKID COLLISION REDUCTION
This Policy Statement provides guidance for the use of pavement friction tests collected by the State Pavement Office. This Policy Statement is adopted from WSDOT Policy P 2035 dated May 18, 2011 which has been retired. 7.6.2
BACKGROUND
The FHWA Technical Advisory on Pavement Friction Management (T 5040.38) states that “. . . a state highway agency should implement a program to manage pavement friction on its public roads.” The advisory refers to the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for Pavement Friction (AASHTO, 2008) as the source of information for developing a pavement friction program. WSDOT is in the process of developing a friction management program. Until that program is developed, WSDOT will follow the procedure described in this Skid Collision Reduction Policy. The literature maintains that collision histories are the best indicators of the cause of wet weather collisions. Wet weather collisions may be caused by complex interactions among roadway, vehicle, human, and environmental factors. Collisions may result from unpredictable factors and random variables. 7.6.1
POLICY STATEMENT
It is the policy of WSDOT to minimize the risk of wet weather skid collisions by using the Skid Collision Reduction Policy as follows. The following rules and responsibilities are established. 7.6.1.1 Test Pavement Friction Every Two Years Pavement friction tests must be conducted on state routes every two years at one-mile intervals to help identify potential skid collision locations.
•
Undivided roads are tested only in one direction.
•
Divided roads with fewer than three lanes are tested in both directions in the outer lane.
•
Divided roads with three or more lanes are tested in both directions in the second lane from the outside.
47
WSDOT Pavement Policy 7.6.1.2 Identify and Rank Safety Needs Use these two primary sources to identify and rank statewide safety needs:
•
Crash history analysis.
•
Roadway geometric/condition modeling that uses skid number assessment. Skid numbers are considered in the development of appropriate solutions to address both collision history and potential collision locations.
7.6.1.3 Locations with Skid Numbers at or Below 30 Locations with skid numbers at or below 30 must be retested promptly. These retests must be completed within the same calendar year and reported to regional authorities. Corrective actions may be required depending on analyses and site inspections. 7.6.1.4 Pavement Office The Pavement Office is responsible for the following:
•
Test pavement friction on a systematic basis (ASTM E-274-Rib Tire) throughout the state highway system on a two-year cycle.
•
Test newly constructed or overlaid pavement that is one lane mile or longer one month or more after completion and before the construction season ends, unless prevented by weather conditions.
•
Retest locations with skid numbers at or below 30 promptly. o
Retests consist of at least five friction tests taken within one quarter mile of the point of the skid number at or below 30.
•
o
Retests report the original low skid number.
o
Retests report the average of the five retests.
Provide the pavement friction test results to the Regional Administrator.
7.6.1.5 Regional Administrator The Regional Administrator is responsible for the following:
•
Manage the Skid Reduction Program within the region to ensure compliance with this Policy Statement.
48
WSDOT Pavement Policy
•
Provide the pavement friction test results to the Region Operations Engineer.
•
In the absence of a Region Operations Engineer, designate a position to carry out those responsibilities and inform the Assistant Secretary.
7.6.1.6 Region Operations Engineer or Designee The Region Operations Engineer or designee is responsible for the following:
• Review friction test results.
• Compare prior pavement friction test results at or below 30 with current friction test results. Determine whether or not adverse collision history has developed at these locations. If so, check whether or not improvements have been scheduled or completed.
• Review pavement friction test results with skid numbers at or below 30 with the Region Maintenance Engineer and Region Traffic Engineer.
• When tests and reviews indicate it is needed, coordinate construction improvements with the Region Maintenance Area Superintendent or with the Region Project Development Office. 7.6.1.7 Region Maintenance Area Superintendent The Region Maintenance Area Superintendent is responsible for the following:
•
Conduct joint field reviews with the Region Traffic Engineer at each site that has skid numbers at or below 30.
•
Schedule construction of the appropriate surface treatment to improve skid resistance. o Use state forces or contract. o Inform the Region Operations Engineer or designee.
•
Remove any “Slippery When Wet” signs installed and inform the Region Traffic Engineer.
7.6.1.8 Region Traffic Engineer The Region Traffic Engineer is responsible for the following:
•
Conduct joint field reviews with the Region Maintenance Area Superintendent at each site that has skid numbers at or below 30.
49
WSDOT Pavement Policy
•
Analyze traffic data records to determine high or potentially high risk of wet weather collision rates in those areas with skid numbers at or below 30.
•
At locations where crash rates or roadway/roadside modeling indicates that a problem exists, recommend solutions either to the Region Operations Engineer or the Region Maintenance Area Superintendent for correction.
•
Direct installation of “Slippery When Wet” signs, when needed, at sites with average skid numbers at or below 30.
•
Direct other immediate corrective action as needed.
7.6.1.9 Region Program Management The Region Program Management Office is responsible to program suitable improvements at locations having a low skid number and a high collision rate, where maintenance has not yet made alterations.
50
WSDOT Pavement Policy
8. DESIGN DETAILS This section provides design standards that are relevant to all phases of pavement design: new pavement, rehabilitation and preservation.
These requirements are to be followed when
designing the applicable pavement type or situation.
8.1
GENERAL DESIGN DETAILS
8.1.1
TRAFFIC DATA
Traffic data from the Transportation Information and Planning Support (TRIP’s) traffic file will be used on most projects, as contained in the Washington State Pavement Management System (WSPMS). Where the State Pavement Office or Region Materials Engineer believes the data in the file is not adequate, a special traffic count on the project can be requested to verify the data. If the region does not have personnel to conduct the traffic counts, the Transportation Data, GIS and Modeling Office shall be contacted for assistance. 8.1.2
SUBGRADE DRAINAGE
For a pavement section to perform well, a system must be provided to avoid prolonged periods of high water content in the base and subgrade. Excess water under the pavement weakens subgrade and unbound base layers, increases the potential for frost heave and can result in pumping with the associated faulting and loss of support. WSDOT’s standard practice for providing subgrade drainage is to use a layer of CSBC under the bound pavement layers. For most pavements in Washington, a CSBC layer is adequate to remove any water that enters through cracks and openings in the pavement surface. Unless the underlying soil is highly permeable, a path needs to be provided for water in the CSBC layer to exit the pavement structure. The preferred method is to daylight the CSBC in the side slope or ditch. If daylighting the CSBC is not possible, an underdrain parallel to the roadway needs to be installed adjacent to the paved shoulder and below the CSBC layer. The underdrain should be connected to the storm drainage system or be routed to another suitable discharge location. Underdrain systems must receive periodic maintenance to remain effective.
51
WSDOT Pavement Policy 8.2
HMA DESIGN DETAILS
8.2.1
ESAL LEVEL FOR DEVELOPING HMA MIX DESIGN
For HMA roadways the HMA mix designs ESALs shall be based on 15 years. In order to reduce the likelihood of stripping, the mix design ESALs for HMA under PCCP shall be less than 0.3 million. HMA shoulders on PCCP roadways are often required to go for long intervals between repaving. To produce a durable mix, the preferred mix design ESALs are less than 0.3 million. If there is other HMA work on the project and the quantity of shoulder HMA is small, consideration should be given to using the same mix design ESALs as the other HMA on the project. WSDOT has found that HMA mixes designed for 30 million ESALs or more (125 gyrations) are prone to premature cracking and raveling due to the lower binder content. Only use mix designs of 30 million ESALs or higher where severe rutting has occurred in the past and other methods will not mitigate the rutting. The use of mix designs with ESALs of 30 million or more requires State Pavement Office approval. 8.2.2
PG BINDER SELECTION CRITERIA
WSDOT uses the Multiple Stress Creep Recovery Test (MSCR) to grade HMA binders. Performance-Graded Binder used within travel lanes on state routes should conform the following table. Table. 8-1 Performance-Graded Binder Selection ESAL Level or Traffic Speed Traffic Speed (mph)
15-Year ESALs (millions)
Binder Grade Eastern Washington Western (Including Washington Mountain Passes) PG64H-28* PG58H-22*
<7
and
> 40
7 to 20
or
15 to 40
PG64H-28
PG58H-22
> 20
and/or
< 15
PG64V-28
PG58V-22
*Use PG58H-22 or PG64H-28 on all WSDOT projects. PG58S-22 or PG64S-28 may be used on other projects at the discretion of the contracting agency.
52
WSDOT Pavement Policy The binder-grade selection criteria is based on 15-year ESALs. Select the binder grade that corresponds to the HMA on the project that will carry the highest 15-year ESAL level or lowest traffic speed on the project. When the ESAL level or traffic speed indicates that more than one grade of binder could be used on a project, and using multiple binder grades is not desirable, binder grades may be substituted as follows: Binders with a High Designation “H” may be substituted for binders with a Standard Designation “S”. Binders with a Very High Designation “V” may be substituted for binders with an “S” or “H” designation. Use the same binder grade for all lifts of HMA regardless of depth. HMA used under PCCP should be PG64H-28 in Eastern Washington including Mountain Passes and PG58H-22 in Western Washington. As an alternative to the above binder selection criteria, the LTPP Bind Online tool located at the LTPP InfoPave website may be used to determine the binder grade. The following inputs should be used: Target Rutting Depth (mm):
12.5
ESALs:
Use 20 years ESALs
Base HT PG:
64 east / 58 west
Adjust the temperatures of the resulting MSCR binder grade from LTPP Bind Online to the temperature grade corresponding to a grade on Table 8.1. For example, LTTP Bind Online results in a grade of PG52H-16 for a project in Western Washington. The binder grade would need to be adjusted to PG58H-22 to match the temperature of the standard grade used by projects in Western Washington. Binders with an “S” designation in LTPP Bind Online would also need to be adjusted to an “H” designation for WSDOT projects. 8.2.3
MINIMUM HMA LIFT THICKNESS
To ensure that adequate compaction is achieved, the following minimum lift thicknesses by class of mix shall be followed. Deviations from the minimum requirements need approval from the State Pavement Office:
53
WSDOT Pavement Policy Table 8.2 HMA Minimum Lift Thickness
8.2.4
Class of HMA Mix
Minimum Lift Thickness ft.
⅜ inch
0.10
½ inch
0.15
¾ inch
0.22
1 inch
0.30
HMA FOR PCCP BASE AND SHOULDERS
HMA used beneath PCCP and HMA shoulders on PCCP roadways shall be compacted to the same requirements as the traveled lanes per WSDOT Standard Specification 5-04.3(10). The HMA base under new PCCP should extend a minimum of 6 inches beyond the edge of the PCCP to ensure a stable base is provided at the edge of the concrete. 8.2.5
LONGITUDINAL JOINTS
Longitudinal joints placed in the wheel path perform poorly and often require corrective maintenance work before the rest of the pavement. Widening an existing roadway often results in the longitudinal joint between the old and new pavement that is in the wheel path. In these situations place the final lift of HMA so the longitudinal joints in the final lift is on the lane line. This may require staging the project so that the entire roadway is inlayed or overlaid following completion of the widening or grinding a portion of the existing pavement so the full width of the final lift in the new lane can be paved in one pass. 8.2.6
MOUNTAIN PASS PAVING CRITERIA
WSDOT has experienced repeated HMA pavement with poor performance or failures on mountain passes. To ensure the highest level of performance the following design/construction elements are required:
•
Utilize a Material Transfer Vehicle (MTV) such as a Shuttle Buggy
•
Use a notch wedge joint for all longitudinal joints with an unconfined edge
•
Place longitudinal joint adhesive on the vertical face of the notch wedge joint
54
WSDOT Pavement Policy
•
Compact shoulders to the same requirements as the traveled lanes in accordance with WSDOT Standard Specification 5-04.3(10)
•
Extend paving limits to one foot beyond the edge stripe or outside the existing rumble strips
•
Utilize trucks with tarps during the placement of HMA
•
Require cyclic density testing or the use of a Pave-IR system to eliminate cyclic temperature differentials in the HMA
•
Consider the use of HMA Class 3/8 inch for the wearing course.
•
Require HMA paving be complete before the onsite of cold weather that will make achieving density difficult.
8.3 8.3.1
PCCP DESIGN DETAILS USE OF WIDENED OUTSIDE LANE
If shoulders are constructed with HMA, at a minimum, the right most lane (truck lane) shall be constructed 14 feet wide and striped at 12 feet. 8.3.2
DOWEL BARS AND TIE BARS
Newly constructed PCCP shall use corrosion resistant dowel bars conforming to Standard Specification 9-07.5(2) (stainless steel, zinc clad etc.). Dowel bar selection criteria for mainline roadway, roundabouts, intersections and shoulders are detailed in Appendix 1. PCCP shoulders shall be tied in all cases and doweled if expected to carry future traffic. Dowels shall be used for the entire transverse joint where a widened PCCP lane (see 9.3.1) is constructed in the right shoulder. The dowel bars should be placed starting 1.0 foot from the longitudinal joint between the PCCP panel and the HMA shoulder. 8.3.3
SHOULDERS
The PCCP placed on shoulders shall be placed concurrent with the outside lane. 8.3.4
JOINTING PLANS
The Standard Plans provide jointing details for mainline PCCP travel lanes and shoulders. Additional jointing details are required to be included in the contract plans for jointing layouts that 
55
WSDOT Pavement Policy are not covered in the Standard Plans such as intersections, roundabouts and tapers. Include proposed joint locations, joint type and isolation joints for utilities. Identify where dowel bars and tie bars are required in the jointing plans. Submit jointing plans to the State Pavement Office for approval with the pavement design report or during PS&E development. The jointing plan included in the contract documents provides a baseline for pavement construction but there are often alternative joint locations that will provide equivalent pavement performance.
Contractors are encouraged to propose alternate jointing plans to improve
constructability. The State Pavement Office approves alternate jointing proposals. 8.3.5
INTERSECTIONS LIMITS
The limits for reconstruction with PCCP shall be determined based on an evaluation of the existing pavement conditions. The area of pavement rutting or distress shall be limited to the vehicle start and stop areas. The major arterial approach legs to intersections may require PCCP from 200 to 500 feet (Uhlmeyer, 2003) back from the crosswalk (Figure 8.1).
inor leg
_______
II II II I
___--+--------------
,
1 I II II II I
□ PCCP
Figure 8.1. PCCP Intersection Limits
56
WSDOT Pavement Policy
9. PAVEMENT DESIGN REPORT A Pavement Design Report is required for all HMA and PCCP preservation, rehabilitation, reconstruction and new construction projects, and is recommended for chip seal overlays where structural problems are evident. The Region Materials Engineer will prepare the report for review by the State Pavement Office.
The report will summarize the existing pavement and site
conditions, include discussion of special features or problems, and provide pavement design/rehabilitation requirements. A Pavement Design Report is optional if all pavement work is incidental to other work on the project provided the new pavement structure is at least equivalent to the existing structure. Examples of incidental pavement work include removing and replacing pavement within the limits of structure excavation or increasing the pavement thickness at bridge ends to match into a bridge overlay. A Pavement Design Report is also not required if all of the pavement work on the project is temporary and will be removed as part of the project. If a Region opts to prepare a Pavement Design Report, an information copy should be sent to the State Pavement Office so it can be scanned and archived. A Pavement Design Report will generally consist of four elements: a description of the project, an evaluation to the conditions at the project site, the pavement thickness design and the specific design details. Some elements that are specific to pavement preservation and rehabilitation will not be needed in Pavement Design Reports that address the design of new pavement only. Each element is described further in the sections that follow.
9.1
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Items that need to be included are: a description of the project (including vicinity maps and plan views if needed to describe the project location), purpose of project, present and future lane configuration, status and scope of project, possible construction contingencies, State Route number, milepost limits, project name, work order number, Project Item Number, and anticipated construction dates.
57
WSDOT Pavement Policy 9.2
SITE EVALUATION
The sit