e evaluation includes specific details of the project that will have an impact on the pavement design. At a minimum include the following in the Pavement Design Report: 9.2.1
TRAFFIC DATA
Include the ADT and estimated ESALs in the design period for each pavement section in the design. ESAL data will generally be supplied by WSPMS. An explanation should be included when other sources of ESAL data are used in the design. 9.2.2
CLIMATE CONDITIONS
Unusual climate conditions such as mountain passes or freeze and thaw conditions that affect the design should be described. 9.2.3
SUBGRADE SOILS AND GEOLOGY
Describe soil conditions encountered in the project limits including the basis of the subgrade modulus used in the pavement design in the report. The basis of the subgrade modulus may be a combination of current or previous soils investigations; previous Pavement Design Reports, field samples and falling weight deflect meter deflection testing. If a deflection survey was conducted the results should be included. Include pertinent topographic features as they relate to subgrade soil changes and pavement performance. Provide documentation of the subgrade modulus values included in the pavement design. 9.2.4
PAVEMENT CONDITION (PRESERVATION AND REHABILITATION ONLY)
Description and photographs of existing pavement conditions with reference to pavement distress, subgrade soils, geologic features, drainage, frost distress or traffic. Provide a summary documenting the HMA and base course thicknesses and the nature of the base and subgrade soils (as noted in section 7.2.3). HMA core sampling shall be taken within the travel lanes every 0.25 to 0.50 miles of the projects length in order to provide a mechanistic-empirical design. Areas of distress that require treatment other than the overall roadway (such as frost heaves or localized pavement failures caused by weak subgrade) shall also be noted. Include a table with core location and core condition in the Pavement Design Report along with photos of distressed cores.
58
WSDOT Pavement Policy 9.2.5
DRAINAGE AND WATER CONDITIONS
Drainage and water conditions that affect the pavement design or may affect pavement performance needs to be explained. Describe pertinent drainage features such as ditches, subgrade drains, drainage blankets, etc., both functioning and non-functioning. Where wet subgrades are encountered, moisture contents should be determined. 9.2.6
CONSTRUCTION HISTORY (PRESERVATION AND REHABILITATION ONLY)
Provide a description or layer profile of the pavement structure and limits as they relate to past contracts.
9.3
PAVEMENT DESIGN
The Pavement Design Report shall include PCCP and HMA design thicknesses where new construction warrants alternate pavement types. The specific design method used in the design shall be included along with justification of design inputs that are different than required by the pavement policy. Pavement designs shall be provided in sufficient detail to develop the contract plans.
9.4
DESIGN DETAILS
Specific criteria concerning pavement design such as correction of special problems, unique use of materials or procedures, drainage features, and frost distress corrections shall be documented. 9.4.1
MATERIALS
The report should describe material requirements that are not covered by the Standard Specifications. Explain the use of a PG binder grade other than the base grade for the project location and include the 15 year design ESALs for HMA mix design. Include state owned materials sources along with special materials when warranted. 9.4.2
CONSTRUCTION CONSIDERATIONS
Strategies to correct specific types of pavement distress including preleveling, digouts, subsealing and crack sealing should be included. Items such as project timing, potential problems with materials sources, etc., should be covered.
59
WSDOT Pavement Policy 9.4.3
PCCP JOINTING DETAILS
Any PCCP that requires jointing details other than that shown in the Standard Plans (such as roundabouts, intersections or non-standard pavement sections) shall be approved by the State Pavement Office. 9.4.4
BRIDGE
The HMA bridge deck rehabilitation treatment option selected for each bridge is to be included in the Pavement Design Report. Concurrence from the Bridge and Structures office shall be included if the bridge deck rehabilitation treatment differs from the options listed in the Bridge Condition Report. Attach a copy of the Bridge Condition Report(s) to the Pavement Design Report. 9.4.5
SPECIAL FEATURES
Review any unique features pertinent to the project not covered under other topics.
9.5
STATE PAVEMENT OFFICE PAVEMENT DESIGN REPORT APPROVAL
The State Pavement Office reviews and evaluates the final Pavement Design Report prepared by the Regions for new construction, reconstruction, pavement rehabilitation and pavement preservation. When necessary, a review comments report is prepared for various requirements of the project. Generally, concurrence will be provided in a signature and date block provided in the Region Pavement Design Report.
60
WSDOT Pavement Policy
REFERENCES AASHTO. 1993. AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures. Washington D.C.: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. AASHTO. 2008. Guide for Pavement Friction. Washington DC: Amaerican Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. ACPA. 2016. Subgrades and Subbases for Concrete Pavements. Engineering Bulletin EB204P, Skokie IL: American Concrete Pavement Association. Anderson, K.W., J.S. Uhlmeyer, and M.A. Russell. 2009. Use of Recycled Concrete Aggregate in PCCP. WA-RD 726.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Anderson, K.W., J.S. Uhlmeyer, J. Weston, K. Willoughby, M. Russell, and C. Fraisure. 2018. Preventive Maintenance Study – Final Report. WA-RD 871.2, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Anderson, K.W., J.S. Uhlmeyer, T. Sexton, M. Russell, and J. Weston. 2014. Evaluation of Long-Term Pavement Performance and Noise Characteristics of the Next Generation Concrete Surface. WA-RD 767.2, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Anderson, K.W., J.S. Uhlmeyer, T. Sexton, M. Russell, and J. Weston. 2013. Summary Report on the Performance of Open Graded Friction Course Quieter Pavements: I-5 Lynnwood, SR520 Medina, I-405 Bellevue. WA-RD 817.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Anderson, K.W., L.M. Pierce, and J.S. Uhlmeyer. 2008. Brief History of the Performance of Rubberized Pavements in Washington State. WA-RD 693.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Aschenbrener, T., E.R. Brown, N. Tran, and P.B. Blankenship. 2017. Demonstration Project for Enhanced Durability of Asphalt Pavements through Increased In-place Pavement Density. NCAT Report 17-05, Auburn AL: National Center for Asphalt Technology - Auburn University. Brown, E.R., M.R. Hainin, A. Cooley, and G. Hurley. 2004. Relationship of Air Voids, Lift Thickness, and Permeability in Hot Mix Asphalt Pavements. NCHRP Report 531, Washington D.C.: Transportation Research Board. Davids, W.G., and G.M. Turkiyyah. 1998. G.M., Modeling of Rigid Pavements: Joint Shear Transfer Mechanisms and Finite Element Solution Strategies. WA-RD 455.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Dell'lsola, A.J., and S.J. Kirk. 1981. Life Cycle Costing for Design Professionals. New York: McGraw-Hill. FHWA. 2016. Bases and Subbases for Concrete Pavement. Tech Brief FHWA-HIF-16-005, Washington DC: Federal Highway Administration. FHWA. 1998. Life Cycle Cost Analysis in Pavement Design. FHWA-SA-98-079, Washington DC: Federal Highway Administration.
61
WSDOT Pavement Policy FHWA. 2010. Technical Advisory on Pavement Friction Management. Washington DC: Federal Highway Administration. Accessed . https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/pavement/t504038.cfm#p01. FHWA. 1987. Techniques for Pavement Rehabilitation, Participants Notebook FHWA-HI-90022. Washington DC: Federal Highway Association. Hansen, M., J. Mahoney, N. Jackson, C. Hunter, and L. Pierce. 2007. Assessment of the I-5 Portland Cement Concrete Pavements in King County. WA-RD 682.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Jackson, D.C., N.C. Jackson, and J.P. Mahoney. 1990. "Washington State Chip Seal Study." Transportation Research Record, Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 1259 110. Jackson, N., J. Mahoney, and J. Puccinelli. 2014. Using Existing Pavement in Place and Achieving Long Life. SHRP 2 Report S2-R23-RR-1, Washington D.C: Transportation Research Board. Jackson, N., J. Puccinelli, and J, Mahoney. 2014. Guide to Using Existing Pavement in Place and Achieving Long Life. SHRP 2 Report S2-R23-RW-2, Washington D.C.: Transportation Research Board. Jackson, N.C., and D.J. O’Neil. 1991. An Evaluation of Granular Overlays in Washington State A Summary. WA-RD, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Kay, K., and N.C. Jackson. 1988. Pavement Performance Equations. WA-RD 143.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Kay, K., and N.C. Jackson. 1993. The WSDOT Pavement Management System - A 1993 Update. WA-RD 274.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Kleskovic, P.Z. 1980. A Discussion of Discount Rates for Economic Analysis of Pavement, Draft Report. Washington DC: FHWA Pavement Division. Lary, J.A., and J. Sharma. 1984. Evaluation of Frost Related Effects on Pavements. WA-RD 67.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Lee, S.W., N.C. Jackson, and D.E. Newcomb. 1988. Mechanistic-Based Overlay Design Procedure for Washington State Flexible Pavements. WA-RD 170.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Li, J., D.R. Luhr, J.S. Uhlmeyer, and J.P. Mahoney. 2014. Evaluation of Maintenance Effectiveness for WSDOT Pavement Network. Transportation Research Board 93rd Annual Meeting, Washington D.C.: Transportation Research Board. Li, J., D.R. Luhr, M. Russell, T. Rydholm, and J.S. Uhlmeyer. 2017. "Cost Effective Performance Management for Washington State Pavement Assets." Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 2639 102-109. Li, J., Uhlmeyer, J.S., J.P. Mahoney, and S.T. Muench. 2010. "Updating the Pavement Design Guide Catalog for the Washington State Department of Transportation: Using 1993 AASHO Guide, Mechanistic Empirical Pavement Design Guide, and Historical Performance." Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 2154 (Transportation Research Board) 124-129. 
62
WSDOT Pavement Policy Linden, R.L., J.P. Mahoney, and N.C. Jackson. 1989. "Effects of Compaction on Asphalt Concrete Performance." Transportation Research Record Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 1271 20-28. Luhr, D.R., J. Li, J.S. Uhlmeyer, and J.P. Mahoney. 2012. "Preservation Strategies for Concrete Pavement Network of Washington State Department of Transportation." Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 2306 11-20. Luhr, D.R., J. Li, J.S. Uhlmeyer, and J.P. Mahoney. 2012. "Preservation Strategies for Flexible Pavement Network of Washington State Department of Transportation." Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 2306 28-35. Mahoney, J.P., C.L. Monismith, J. Coplantz, J.T. Harvey, V. Kannekanti, L.M. Pierce, J.S. Uhlmeyer, N. Sivaneswarn, and T. Hoover. 2007. Pavement Lessons from the 50-Year-Old Interstate highway System: California, Oregon, and Washington. Transportation Research Circular E-C118, Washington D.C.: Transportation Research Board. Mahoney, J.P., M. Slater, C. Keifenheim, J. Uhlmeyer, T. Moomaw, and K. Willoughby. 2014. WSDOT Chip Seal Optimal Timing, Design and Construction considerations. WA-RD 837.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Transportation Center, Washington State Department of Transportation. Mahoney, J.P., M.S. Rutherford, and R.G. Hicks. 1986. Guidelines for Spring Highway Use Criteria for Highway Load Restrictions: Where, How Much and When. WA-RD 80.2, Olympia WA: Washington State Transportation Center, Washington Department of Transportation. Mallick, R.B., Cooley Jr. L.A., M.R. Teto, R.L. Bradbury, and D. Peabody. 2003. An Evaluation of Factors Affecting Permeability of Superpave Designed Pavements – NCAT Report 03-02. NCAT Report 03-02, Auburn AL: National Center for Asphalt Technology, Auburn University. Maupin, Jr. G.W. 2010. Investigation of Optimized Mixture Design for Superpave Surface Mixtures. Final Report VTRC 11-R5, Charlottesville VA: Virginia Transportation Research Council. MnDOT. 2014. Best Practices in Pavement Design for Design-Build Projects. Transportation Research Synthesis 1402, Saint Paul, MN: Minnesota Department of Transportation. Muench, S.T., and J.P. Mahoney. 2001. A Quantification and Evaluation of WSDOT’s Statistical Acceptance Specification. WA-RD 490.2, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Muench, S.T., L.M. Pierce, J.S. Uhlmeyer, and K.W. Anderson. 2010. A Brief History of LongLife WSDOT Concrete Pavements. WA-RD 744.2, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Newcomb, D.E., A.A. Bubushait, and J. Sharma. 1983. State-of-the-Art on Pavement Overlay Design Procedures, Vol. I and II. WA-RD 65.1 and 65.2, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. OMB. 1992 - Updated 2015. Guidelines and Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal Programs, Circular No. A-94 (Revised). Office of Management and Budget. Penn DOT. 2001. Publication 242 - Pavement Policy Manual. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 
63
WSDOT Pavement Policy Peters-Davis, K., and D.H. Timm. 2009. Recalibration of the Asphalt Layer Coefficient. NCAT Report 09-03, Auburn AL: National Center for Asphalt Technology - Auburn University. Peterson, D.E. 1985. Life Cycle Cost Analysis of Pavements. NCHRP Synthesis of Highway Practice No. 122, Washington DC: Highway Research Board. Pierce, L.M. 1994. "Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation in Washington State: Case Study." Transportation Research Record, Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 1449 189-198. Pierce, L.M., and S.T. Muench. 2009. Evaluation of Dowel Bar Retrofit for Long-Term Pavement Life in Washington State. WA-RD 727.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Pierce, L.M., J.P. Mahoney, Muench S.T., J. Li, J.S. Uhlmeyer, K. Willoughby, and D.R. Luhr. 2010. "Utilization of Bituminous Surface Treatments for Maintaining Asphalt Concrete Pavements Due to Restricted Budgetary Constraints in Washington State." Compendium of Papers from the First International Conference on Pavement Preservation. Newport Beach CA: California Department of Transportation; Federal Highway Administration; Foundation for Pavement Preservation. 73-84. Pierce, L.M., J.S. Uhlmeyer, and J.T. Weston. 2009. Dowel Bar Retrofit Do’s and Don’ts. WARD 576.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. rePave. 2014. SHRP2 R23 Scoping Methodology Including Advanced Renewal Systems. Accessed May 27, 2015. http://www.pavementrenewal.org/. Rutherford, M.S., R.G. Hicks, and T. Rwebangira. 1985. Guidelines for Spring Highway Use Restrictions. WA-RD 80.1 and FHWA - RD-86-501, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Sharma, J., and J. Hallin. 1983. Evaluation of Present Legislation and Regulations on Tire Sizes, Configurations and Load Limits. WA-RD 59.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Tayabji, S., and L. Seungwook. 2007. Tech Brief – Long-Life Concrete Pavements: Best Practices and Directions from the States. Tech Brief FHWA-HIF-07-030, Washington D.C.: Federal Highway Administration. TRB. 2005. Factors Affecting Compaction of Asphalt Pavements. Transportation Research Circular E-C105, Washington D.C.: Transportation Research Board. Uhlmeyer, J.S. 2003. PCCP Intersections Design and Construction in Washington State. WARD 503.2, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Uhlmeyer, J.S., J.P. Mahoney, J.S. Lovejoy, and G.E. Gibson. 2001. "Granular Overlays on Low-Volume Roads in Washington State." Transportation Research Record, Journal of the Transportation Research Board Issue 1778 182-190. Uhlmeyer, J.S., K. Willoughby, L.M. Pierce, and J.P. Mahoney. 2000. "Top-Down Cracking in Washington State Asphalt Wearing Courses." Transportation Research Record 1730 (Transportation Research Board) 110-116.
64
WSDOT Pavement Policy Willoughby, K., and J. Mahoney. 2007. An Assessment of WSDOT’s Hot Mix Asphalt Quality Control and Assurance Requirements. WA-RD 517.2, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Willoughby, K.A., J.P. Mahoney, L.M. Pierce, J.S. Uhlmeyer, K.W. Anderson, S. Read, S.T. Muench, T.R. Thompson, and R. Moore. 2001. Construction-Related Asphalt Concrete Pavement Temperature Differentials and the Corresponding Density Differentials. WA-RD 476.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. Winters, B.C., K. Chatti, T.J. Moran, C.L. Monismith, and S.L. Kramer. 1995. Vehicle/Pavement Interaction at the PACCAR Test Site. WA-RD 384.1, Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation. WSDOT. 1995. WSDOT Pavement Guide, Volumes 1 and 2, Final. Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Transportation.
65
WSDOT Pavement Policy
66
WSDOT Pavement Policy
APPENDIX 1 – DOWEL BAR TYPE SELECTION Dowel bars in portland cement concrete pavement (PCCP) have been proven to extend pavement life. Dowel bars transfer loads from panel to panel, supplementing the aggregate interlock at the panel joint. Aggregate interlock degrades over time, while dowel bars are expected to continue to be effective for upwards of 50 years. WSDOT designs PCCP to last 50 years, so it is critical that the dowel bars remain intact and functional, for this period. Different materials used for dowel bars have different performance lives, given various exposures to weather and corrosive chemicals. The hardest environment for dowel bars are wet locations with exposure to salts/corrosive agents (either naturally from the environment, such as sea spray, or from chemical antiicing compounds). Dowel bars placed in dry climates without exposure to salts/corrosive agents experience the mildest environment. For the same moisture and salt/corrosive environment, warmer climates would induce more corrosion than colder environments. The purpose of the dowel bar type selection process is to balance risk and cost. In an unconstrained funding scenario, one would select the least risky dowel bar material: the one most resistant to corrosion. WSDOT will always be under some type of funding constraint. Risk and cost, for each type of dowel bar material, is illustrated in the following table: Dowel Bar Type Solid stainless steel Stainless steel clad Stainless steel sleeve with epoxy coated insert Low-carbon chromium steel (patented steel bar) and Jarden Lifejacket® dowel bar (zinc clad Epoxy coated (AASHTO M-284) Black steel (uncoated)
Cost
Corrosion Resistance
Most expensive
Best corrosion resistance
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓ Least expensive
⇓ Worst corrosion resistance
Corrosion resistance increases as does cost when moving from black steel to stainless steel dowels. Additionally, there is a direct link, then, between risk and cost: less risk, higher cost; lowest cost, greatest risk of corrosion before 50 years.
Climate Wet climates promote corrosion in steel more than drier climates. In general, western Washington has the greatest potential for exposure to moisture in PCCP. Most of eastern Washington is considerably drier, experiencing more snow but less rainfall and less overall moisture.
Corrosion PCCP directly adjacent to salt water has a high-risk exposure to corrosive salts. Fortunately, little PCCP has this type of exposure in Washington State. The greatest exposure to corrosive salts will be in locations where the highway is regularly treated with salts/corrosive agents during the winter months. Mountain passes, particularly those with “clear pavement” requirements (wherein Maintenance maintains the highway in a snow/ice free condition) will have the greatest exposure.
67
WSDOT Pavement Policy
Traffic Loading Trucks present the greatest loading risk for load transfer between adjacent PCCP panels. Truck lanes (usually Lane 1 (rightmost lane) or Lane 2, depending on the total number of lanes) will have the greatest number of ESALs. Risk of load transfer failure increases with increasing ESALs. Lanes with the greatest truck traffic will need more dowels to ensure efficient load transfer. On multi-lane highways, the travel lanes (Lanes 3, 4 or 5) will typically have much fewer trucks. These lanes can be designed with fewer dowel bars per lane and still reach a 50-year pavement life.
Dowel Bar Alternatives 1. Stainless Steel  Solid stainless. Solid stainless bars are not recommended at this time due to their high initial cost.  Stainless steel clad. These bars employ a patented manufacturing process that metallurgically bonds ordinary steel and stainless steel.  Stainless steel sleeves with an epoxy coated dowel bar insert. These bars have an epoxycoated bar that is inserted into a thin walled stainless steel tube. 2. Low-carbon chromium steel and Zinc Clad  Low-carbon chromium (ASTM A1035) steel dowel bars. These bars are high chromium but below the threshold to be classified as stainless. In addition, these bars have a dual phase steel microstructure that resists corrosion. Currently patented and manufactured by MMFX Steel Corporation (USA).  Zinc clad dowel bar supplied by Jarden Zinc Products. This dowel bar is produced by mechanically bonding a solid zinc strip to a standard steel dowel bar. The zinc layer provides two-fold protection: (1) surface barrier to minimize chloride attack and (2) cathodic protection. 3. Epoxy Coated  Epoxy coated. Traditional black steel bars with epoxy coating (ASTM A 934)
Application of Dowel Bar Type Selection 1. New Mainline Construction The only Dowel Bar Alternatives allowed under new construction are stainless steel alternates, lowcarbon chromium steel (ASTM A1035) and Zinc Clad. Dowel Bar Spacing:
• Truck lanes (lanes 1 and 2 in multi-lane highways): Eleven dowel bars per joint, first dowel bar is located 12 inches from lane edge and spaced on 12 inch centers.
• Non-truck lanes (Lanes 3, 4 or 5 in multi-lane highways): Eight dowel bars per joint (four in each wheel path), first and last dowel bar is located 12 inches from lane edge and spaced on 12 inch centers.
• Dowels shall be used for the portion of widened lanes starting 1.0 foot from the panel shoulder edge.
• HOV lanes: Eight dowel bars per joint (four in each wheel path), first and last dowel bar is located 12 inches from lane edge and spaced on 12 inch centers. Note: The design for HOV lanes assumes these will remain as HOV lanes. The designer/engineer of record should carefully examine the potential future use of the HOV lanes to estimate the risk of this lane being converted to use by truck traffic. If there is a significant risk of the HOV lane being converted to a truck traffic lane, then the eleven dowel bars per joint configuration should be used.
68
WSDOT Pavement Policy
•
•
Widened truck or outside lanes: Where 14 foot wide panels are used (12 foot land and 2 foot widened shoulder). Dowels are required for the widened shoulder located 12 inches from lane edge and spaced on 12 inch centers. Concrete Intersections: Eight dowels per joint, four in each wheel path, first and last dowel bar is located 12 inches from lane edge and spaced on 12 inch centers.
2. PCCP Intersections and Roundabouts: The only Dowel Bar Alternatives allowed under new construction are stainless steel alternates, lowcarbon chromium steel and zinc clad. Dowel Bar Spacing:
• Roundabouts and signalized intersections: First dowel bar is located 12 inches from lane edge and spaced on 12 inch centers. Dowel bars are required for both the major and minor legs of the intersection for the intersection square. Tie bars are sufficient for longitudinal joints for the major and minor legs.
• Roundabout truck aprons: First dowel bar is located 12 inches from lane edge and spaced on 12 inch centers. 3. Dowel Bar Retrofit (DBR) and Panel Replacement projects: Dowel Bar Alternatives: Stainless steel alternatives, low-carbon chromium steel, zinc clad and epoxy coated (ASTM A1078 Type 2)
• DBR projects are projected to have useful lives of about 15 years, reducing the need for corrosion resistant dowel bars. Any of the dowel bar alternatives may be used. Dowel bar spacing remains three bars per wheel path regardless of the dowel type.
• Panel replacement projects may use any of the dowel bar alternatives. 4. Dowel Bar Specifications The WSDOT Standard Specifications include the current dowel bar specifications:
• Section 5-01 - Cement Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation (Requirements)
• Section 5-05 - Cement Concrete Pavement (Requirements)
• Section 9-07.5 - Dowel Bars (Materials)
69
WSDOT Pavement Policy
70
WSDOT Pavement Policy
APPENDIX 2 – FROST DEPTH CONTOUR MAPS
35
Waiel'Vil .e
Couliee
~
40
---- 35 We atchee 6p rata
----- --- -30 3 1)
/ oi.e: contou rs and contour locations a re ap,proximate
Figure A2.1. Expected depth of freeze (inches) for fine grained soil corresponding to design freezing index (dry density = 100 pcf, wc = 20%)
71
WSDOT Pavement Policy
65
60 - -- - - - - - - --1
- - -- .
Note: oontourn and cootoor ,locations are appro:ximate
Figure A2.2. Expected depth of freeze (inches) for coarse grained soil corresponding to design freezing index (dry density = 130 pcf, wc = 5%) 
72
WSDOT Pavement Policy
te: contoUIB ~md oo11!
are approxi nate
.
our bcaoons
Figure A2.3. Expected depth of freeze (inches) based on field measurements during the winters of 1949 and 1950.
73
WSDOT Pavement Policy
74
WSDOT Pavement Policy
APPENDIX 3 – PAVEMENT TYPE SELECTION CRITERIA The information presented in Appendix 3 is intended as a guide for determining the pavement type selection for individual projects. Pavement type selection is a three-part process which includes a pavement design analysis, life cycle cost analysis and evaluation of project specific details. Each of the following section provides examples and discussion necessary to prepare the final pavement type selection determination.
Pavement Design Analysis The pavement design should be performed first, since the results may preclude the need to continue with the remainder of the pavement type selection process (life cycle cost analysis and project specific details). The pavement design analysis includes the review and analysis of the following: subgrade competency, traffic analysis, materials, climate/drainage, environment, construction considerations, and any other pavement design factors. 1. Subgrade Competency This is the only “go/no go” decision to be made under the pavement design analysis. HMA tends to perform better in situations where long-term settlement is expected. If the engineering evaluation of the subgrade concludes the presence of peat or organic silts or the potential for long-term settlement that exceeds two or more inches, then the pavement type selection is complete and HMA is the selected pavement type. If the engineering evaluation of the subgrade concludes that either pavement type is viable, then the pavement type selection process proceeds to the next step. 2. Classification for Pavement Design Pavements can be divided into different traffic classes depending on light to heavy traffic. HMA and PCCP can be designed to accommodate these wide traffic ranges. For each of the pavement classes, traffic is quantified according to the number of ESALs. Based on the traffic volume and traffic growth rate, the design traffic loading can be estimated over the structural design period or the analysis period. The design traffic loading determines the pavement thickness needed to support the traffic loading over the structural design period. Correctly estimating design traffic is crucial to selecting an appropriate pavement type. To calculate the total design traffic per lane that a pavement will carry over its structural design life, it is necessary to estimate present traffic loading. To estimate future traffic loadings, traffic growth rates should be used. Depending on the roadway segment’s importance, conducting a sensitivity analysis to compare growth rates and the impact of the growth rate on pavement thickness may be worthwhile. 3. Materials Selecting materials for a road pavement design is determined by the availability of suitable materials, environmental considerations, construction methods, economics, and previous performance. To select the materials that best suit the conditions, these factors must be evaluated during the design to ensure a wholelife cycle strategy. 3.1. Availability and Performance Most road construction materials have been classified and specifications prepared for each of the material classes. Every road pavement, independent of its type and applied materials, is subjected to certain traffic loads and environmental factors. These factors create various deterioration modes under in-service conditions. Deterioration modes and the pavement’s susceptibility to various deteriorating factors depend
75
WSDOT Pavement Policy on the type of pavement and materials applied. Table A3.1 shows the pavement deterioration modes for HMA and PCCP. Table A3.1 Pavement Deterioration Modes HMA Pavements
PCCP

Surface deterioration − Decrease in friction − Rutting − Surface cracking − Raveling (stripping) − Roughness − Studded tire wear

Surface deterioration − Decrease in friction − Surface cracking − Curling and warping − Joint raveling − Roughness − Studded tire wear

Structural deterioration − Base and subgrade rutting − Fatigue cracking − Reflective cracking

Structural deterioration − Cracking − Pumping − Faulting
Pavement surface defects may only require surface course maintenance or rehabilitation. Structural deterioration is a defect of the whole pavement structure and treating it may require more extensive pavement rehabilitation. Knowing the difference between these two types of deterioration is important to maintaining and properly understanding pavement durability (or pavement life). Past performance with a particular material should be considered in tandem with applicable traffic and environmental factors. The performance of similar pavements or materials under similar circumstances should also be considered. Information from pre-existing designs, material tests, and pavement management data can help characterize a specific material’s suitability for pavement applications. WSDOT’s experience has been that all pavement types are affected by studded tire wear (see Figures A3.1 and A3.2). The abrasion on pavement surfaces caused by studded tires, wears down the pavement surface at a much greater rate than any other pavement/tire interaction. The same can be said for open graded surface courses and wear due to buses with snow chains. Significant surface deterioration has occurred in as little as 4 to 6 years on HMA and 10 to 15 years on PCCP. For the pavement type selection process, this implies that future rehabilitation timing may be reduced for each pavement type due to the damaging effect of studded tires and should be considered in the analysis until such a time that studded tire use is prohibited.
Figure A3.1. Studded Tire Wear on PCCP
Figure A3.2. Studded Tire Wear on HMA
76
WSDOT Pavement Policy 3.2. Recycling To enhance sustainable development, consider using recycled materials in roadway construction. Future rehabilitation or maintenance treatments, if applicable, should incorporate recycled materials whenever possible. 3.3. HMA Mixes WSDOT has used four basic types of dense graded mixes which are described by the nominal maximum aggregate size (NMAS). These are ⅜-inch, ½-inch, ¾-inch, and 1-inch. Recent use has almost entirely consisted of ⅜-inch, ½-inch mixes. Binder selection for HMA mixes is based on the PG grading system and the following criteria:
• Base PG grades with no adjustment for traffic speed or ESAL level o Western Washington: PG 58H-22 o Eastern Washington: PG 64H-28 o PG 58S-22 or PG64S-28 may be used on non-WSDOT projects
• Adjustment for slow traffic (15 to 40 mph) or moderate loading (7 to 20 M ESALs) o Western Washington: PG 58H-22 o Eastern Washington: PG 64H-28
• Adjustment for standing traffic (less than 15 mph) and/or high loading (>20 M ESALs) o Western Washington: PG 58V-22 o Eastern Washington: PG 64V-28 4. Climate/Drainage Both surface runoff and subsurface water control must be considered. Effective drainage design prevents the pavement structure from becoming saturated. Effective drainage is essential for proper pavement performance and is assumed in the structural design procedure. WSDOT rarely includes open graded drainage layers in its pavement structures. This does occur only for extreme subsurface drainage issues. 5. Pavement Design Pavement design shall be conducted in accordance with the WSDOT Pavement Policy. All pavement designs, rehabilitation strategies, and rehabilitation timing must be submitted, for approval, to the Pavement Design Engineer at the State Pavement Office. 5.1. Additional PCCP Consideration WSDOT has demonstrated that the PCCP constructed in the late 1950s through the 1960s are able to obtain a 50-year or more pavement life as long as joint faulting can be overcome. The ability to provide adequate joint design to minimize joint faulting is addressed by requiring the use of non-erodible bases and dowel bars (1-½ inch diameter by 18 inch length) at every transverse joint. The use of epoxy-coated dowel bars, both locally and nationally, does not necessarily ensure that a 50-year performance life will be obtained. Dowel bar specifications require the use of corrosion resistant dowel bars (stainless steel alternatives, low-carbon chromium steel (ASTM A1035) or Zinc clad) on all newly constructed PCCP (Appendix 1). Rehabilitation of PCCP will potentially require diamond grinding following 20 to 30 years of traffic to address studded tire wear. 5.2. Additional HMA Considerations For heavily trafficked roadways (primarily the interstate and principal arterials), the pavement thickness should be designed to such a depth that future roadway reconstruction is not necessary. The pavement thickness should be designed for 50 years so that traffic will not generate significant bottom up (fatigue) cracking. Future mill and fill or HMA overlays will be required to address surface distress (rutting or top down cracking) and aging of the HMA surface.
77
WSDOT Pavement Policy 5.3. Effect of Studded Tire Wear. In the past, WSDOT has increased the PCCP slab thickness by one inch to accommodate future diamond grinding(s). The current PCCP slab thicknesses contained in Table 5.1 includes an additional inch for grinding and adding an additional inch when using the design table is no longer necessary. Studded tire damage is also a concern for HMA pavements. WSDOT has constructed a number of stone matrix asphalt (SMA) pavements, but have had a number of construction related difficulties, such that the ability to determine the impact that a SMA will have on reducing studded tire damage is unknown. In the life cycle cost analysis, the accelerated wear on HMA pavements will be incorporated through a shorter performance period on future overlays (but only as supported by Pavement Management data). 6. Construction Considerations Pavement construction issues are an important component of the selection of pavement type. These issues can include:  Pavement thickness constraints. Consider the impact of utilities below the pavement and overhead clearances may have on limiting the layer thickness and type, and/or limit future overlay thickness.  Effects on detours, bypasses, and alternate routes. Consider the geometric and structural capacity of detours, bypasses and alternate routes to accommodate rerouted traffic.  Effects of underground pipes and services on performance. Determine the impact of existing utilities and future utility upgrades on initial and future rehabilitation treatments.  Anticipated future improvements and upgrades. Consider if the pavement type restricts or minimizes the ability to efficiently and cost effectively upgrade and/or improve the roadway width, geometry, structural support, etc.  Impact on maintenance operations, including winter maintenance. Will the selected pavement type have impacts due to freeze-thaw (surface and full-depth) or snow and ice removal?  Grades, curvature, and unique loadings (slow-moving vehicles and starting and stopping). How will steep grades, curvature and unique loadings impact pavement performance? Slow moving vehicles will generate increased strain levels in the HMA pavement structure and these strains can significantly impact pavement performance (i.e. rutting and cracking).  A schedule analysis may need to be conducted to determine critical construction features (haul truck access, traffic control constraints – road closures, etc.) and their impact on the project. This should also include staging analysis for multiple projects within the project corridor (to ensure that alternate routes are free of traffic delay due to construction activities). The Construction Analysis for Pavement Rehabilitation Strategies R3 software is useful in determining construction impacts and duration. 7. Other Factors Evaluate other factors that are unique to the project or corridor.
Life Cycle Cost Analysis Life cycle cost analysis provides a useful tool to assist in the pavement type selection. Only differential factors should be considered. The alternative resulting in the lowest net present value or annualized cost over a given analysis period is considered the most cost efficient. Life cycle costs refer to all costs that are involved with the construction, maintenance, rehabilitation and associated user impacts of a pavement over a given analysis period. Life cycle cost analysis is an economic comparison of all feasible construction or rehabilitation alternatives, evaluated over the same analysis period. A feasible alternative meets the required constraints, such as geometric alignment, construction period, traffic flow conditions, clearances, right-of-way, etc. (FHWA, 1987). At a minimum, one HMA and one PCCP alternative should be evaluated. The total cost (initial construction, maintenance, rehabilitation, and user costs) of each design alternative can be compared based on the present value or equivalent uniform annual cost.
78
WSDOT Pavement Policy The life cycle cost analysis is conducted using the FHWA life cycle cost analysis software, which is available through the State Pavement Office. The Federal Highway Administration’s policy on life cycle cost analysis “is that it is a decision support tool, and the results of the life cycle cost analysis are not decisions in and of themselves. The logical analytical evaluation framework that life cycle cost analysis fosters is as important as the life cycle cost analysis results themselves.” (FHWA, 1998). Net present value is the economic efficiency indictor of choice (FHWA, 1998). The annualized method is appropriate, but should be derived from the net present value. Computation of benefit/cost ratios is generally not recommended because of the difficulty in sorting out costs and benefits for use in the benefit/cost ratios (FHWA, 1998). Future costs should be estimated in constant dollars and discounted to the present using a discount rate. The use of constant dollars and discount rates eliminates the need to include an inflation factor for future costs. 1. Net Present Value The present value method is an economic method that involves the conversion of all of the present and future expenses to a base of today's costs (Dell’Isola, 1981). The totals of the present value costs are then compared one with another. The general form of the present value equation is as follows: NPV = F
1 n
(1+ i)
Where, NPV = Net Present Value F = Future sum of money at the end of n years n = Number of years i = Discount rate 2. Annualized Method The annualized method is an economic procedure that requires converting all of the present and future expenditures to a uniform annual cost (Dell'Isola, 1981). This method reduces each alternative to a common base of a uniform annual cost. The costs are equated into uniform annual costs through the use of an appropriate discount rate (Kleskovic, 1990). Recurring costs, such as annual maintenance, are already expressed as annual costs. A given future expenditure, such as a pavement overlay, must first be converted to its present value before calculating its annualized cost. The general form of the Annualized cost equation is as follows:
A = PV
i(1+ i) n (1+ i) n − 1
Where, A = Annual cost PV = Present Value n = Number of years i = Discount rate 3. Economic Analysis The costs to be included in the analysis are those incurred to plan, work on and maintain the pavement during its useful life. All costs that can be attributed to the alternative and that differ from one alternative to another must be taken into account. These include costs to the highway agencies and user costs.
79
WSDOT Pavement Policy 3.1. Performance Period As a pavement ages, its condition gradually deteriorates to the point where some type of rehabilitation treatment is necessary. The timing between rehabilitation treatments is defined as the performance life. An example of this is illustrated in Figure A3.3. Performance life for the initial pavement design and subsequent rehabilitation activities has a major impact on life cycle cost analysis results (FHWA, 1987).
Pavement Condition
Rehabilitation Treatments
------~•1 ', Performance Life
\
Condition trend
'r- if pavement is
not maintained
\
\ \ \ I
I
Terminal Quality Level Structural Design Period
Analysis Period
Time
Figure A3.3. Example of Pavement Performance Life When available, the performance life of the various rehabilitation alternatives should be determined based on past performance history. In these cases, the WSPMS provides history on past pavement performance lives. In instances where the anticipated performance life is not well established (i.e., due to improved engineering and technologies), selection of the performance life will be coordinated and concurred upon by the State Pavement Office. 3.2. Initial Construction Costs Unit costs vary according to location, the availability of materials, the scope of the project and any applicable standards. They can be estimated based on previous experiences, generally by averaging the bids submitted for recent projects of similar scope. Typical item costs can be located in bid item tabulations. The bid item costs may need to be adjusted according to local availability and work constraints. Mobilization, engineering and contingencies, and preliminary engineering can be excluded (sales tax should be included) for the initial construction cost estimate, since these costs are similar for HMA and PCCP. 3.3. Maintenance and Rehabilitation Costs The type and frequency of future maintenance and rehabilitation operations vary according to the pavement type being considered. Knowing how a particular pavement type performed in the past is a valuable guide in predicting future performance (Penn DOT, 2001). The WSPMS should be reviewed for past performance of rehabilitation and maintenance schedules. Costs must always be determined as realistically and accurately as possible based on local context and specific project features. When calculating the rehabilitation costs, include the cost of pavement resurfacing or PCCP rehabilitation, planning or diamond grinding, shoulders, pavement repair, drainage and guardrail adjustments, maintenance and protection of traffic, etc. Mobilization, engineering, contingencies, preliminary engineering, and sales tax should be included in all rehabilitation costs if they were included in the initial construction cost.
80
WSDOT Pavement Policy Construction duration should reflect the actual construction time that is required for each pavement type. Construction durations should consider improvements, proposals or innovative contracting procedures in construction processes. If a difference exists in routine maintenance costs between the various alternatives, these costs should be included in the life cycle cost analysis. Table A3.2 contains a probable scenario corresponding to average traffic and climate conditions, assuming that state-of-the-art practices have been followed during construction and that maintenance and rehabilitation projects are carried out efficiently and on schedule. Table A3.2. Rehabilitation Scenario for HMA and PCCP Year
HMA Pavement
0
Construction or reconstruction
15
0.15’ mill and HMA overlay
20 30
PCCP Construction or reconstruction Diamond grinding
0.15’ HMA overlay
40
Diamond grinding
45
0.15’ mill and HMA overlay
50
Salvage value (if applicable)
Salvage value (if applicable)
3.4. Salvage Value Salvage value is the asset value at the end of the analysis period. The difference between the salvage values of the various alternatives for a project can be small, because discounting can considerably reduce this value, but the size of this reduction is influenced by the actual discount rate chosen. As for the value assigned to the pavement materials, or terminal value, predicting the proportion of recovery or recycling of these materials on-site at the end of the analysis period is uncertain. If an alternative has reached its full life cycle at the end of the analysis period, it is generally considered to have no remaining salvage value. If it has not completed a life cycle, it is given a salvage value, which is usually determined by multiplying the last construction or rehabilitation cost, by the ratio of the remaining expected life cycle to the total expected life.
Salvage Value = CC x Where, CC = ERL = TEL =
ERL TEL
Last construction or rehabilitation project costs Expected remaining life of the last construction or rehabilitation project Total expected life of the last construction or rehabilitation project
3.5. User Costs It is difficult to determine whether or not one rehabilitation alternative results in a higher vehicle operating cost than another. Therefore, the user costs associated with each of the rehabilitation alternatives shall be determined using only costs associated with user delay. This shall be based on the construction periods and the traffic volumes that are affected by each of the rehabilitation alternatives. Several studies have been performed that associate cost with the amount of time the user is delayed through a construction project. The method used is not as important as using the same method for each of the alternatives.
81
WSDOT Pavement Policy The costs associated with user delays are estimated only if the effects on traffic differ among the alternatives being analyzed. For future rehabilitation work, user costs associated with delays can be substantial for heavily travelled roadways, especially when work is frequent. While there are several different sources for the dollar value of time delay, the recommended mean values and ranges for the value of time (in 2006 dollars) shown in Table A3.3, are reasonable. Table A3.3. Recommended Dollar Values per Vehicle Hour of Delay (FHWA, 1998) (adjusted to 2015 dollars) Value Per Vehicle Hour
Vehicle Class Passenger Vehicles Single-Unit Trucks Combination Trucks
Value
Range
$17.34 $27.90 $33.93
$15 to $20 $26 to $30 $32 to $36
3.6. Other Costs Surfacing types and characteristics influence the noise emitted on tire-to-pavement contact. If construction of a noise attenuation structure is planned, the cost of that structure must be included in the treatment costs of the alternative being analyzed. The issue of safety can be addressed similarly. 3.7. Discount Rate "In a life cycle cost analysis, a discount rate is needed to compare costs occurring at different points in time. The discount rate reduces the impact of future costs on the analysis, reflecting the fact that money has a time value" (Peterson, 1985). The discount rate is defined as the difference between the market interest rate and inflation, using constant dollars. Table A3.4. Shows recent trends in the real treasury interest rates for various analysis periods published in the annual updates to OMB Circular A-94 (OMB). For all life cycle cost analysis, a discount rate of four percent shall be used as is supported by the longterm rates shown in Table A3.4. Table A3.4. Real Treasury Interest Rates (OMB)
Year
3-Year
5-Year
7-Year
10-Year
30-Year
1979
2.8
3.4
4.1
4.6
5.4
1980 1981
2.1 3.6
2.4 3.9
2.9 4.3
3.3 4.4
3.7 4.8
1982 1983
6.1 4.2
7.1 4.7
7.5 5.0
7.8 5.3
7.9 5.6
1984 1985
5.0 5.9
5.4 6.5
5.7 6.8
6.1 7.1
6.4 7.4
1986 1987
4.6 2.8
5.1 3.1
5.6 3.5
5.9 3.8
6.7 4.4
1988 1989
3.5 4.1
4.2 4.8
4.7 5.3
5.1 5.8
5.6 6.1
1990 1991
3.2 3.2
