tatement that specifies what, if anything, needs to be done if this bid item is used in the project. Some of the statements that are listed in this column are as follows:
STANDARD ITEM •
Indicates bid item is a standard item and is covered in the Standard Specifications.
Standard Specification 7-01.5 “Payment” shows standard items can also include fill-ins. •
The “Standard Item Table” will note “Standard Item” in the far right column “item use”. •
Decide whether information concerning this bid item, as addressed in the Standard
Specifications, is sufficient or whether a “project-specific provision” is required.
REQUIRES SPECIAL PROV.
If one of the following is needed: •

Revise the appropriate section or sections in the Standard Specifications other than a fill-in. •
Supplement the appropriate section or sections in the Standard Specifications other than a fill-in. •
Write a “stand-alone” project-specific specification when the Standard Specifications does not contain: Description, Materials, Construction Requirements, Measurement and/or Payment for an item of work. •
The “Standard Item Table” will note “Requires Special Prov.” in the far right column “item use”.
STD. ITEM, GSP REQUIRED •
Bid item is a standard item, covered in the Standard Specifications. •
The General Special Provision (GSP) needs to be included in the contract Special
Provisions when the “Standard Item Table” notes “GSP Item” in the far right column “item use”. Ensure each GSP is applicable meaning “project-specific” to the contract.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-23

Contract Plans
Division 4
GSP ITEM •
A GSP exists for the specific contract type and must be included in the contract Special
Provisions. Ensure GSP is applicable or “project-specific” to the contract such as “Use in all projects” or “Use in all Federal Aid Projects.”
REQ. SPECIAL & HQ APPROVAL •
When the “Standard Item Table” notes “Req. Special & HQ Approval” in the far right column “item use,” a project-specific provision must be written, and HQ Construction
Office approval must be given prior to including this project-specific provision in the
Special Provisions in the contract.
HEADQUARTERS USE ONLY •

Bid item will be included in contracts only when directed by the HQ Construction Office.
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION •
When the “Standard Item Table” notes “Technical Specification” in the far right column “item use” the bid item requires a technical project specific provision to be written. HQ
Construction Office must approve. •
Architects generally write this type of Special Provision. These bid items are typically used only for architectural-type work (such as building facilities construction at ferry terminals and rest areas).
SUPERSTRUCTURE ITEM • • right column “item use” are to be used only to provide lump sum breakout data for bid item 4300 “Superstructure – XXXXXX.”
DO NOT use the 9000 series bid items as stand-alone bid items in your contract estimate. 400.06(5)(e) Quantities
Do not duplicate a quantity within the body of the plans. The item totals shown in the Summary of Quantities are to be the sum of the quantities shown for the item throughout the plans.
Quantities are typically listed in the Quantity Tabulation, Structure Note, and Profile Plan sheets.
When quantities for an item appear in places other than where the contractor expects to find them, or when quantities for an item appear in two or more places throughout the plans, include a cross-referencing statement, such as “FOR ADDITIONAL QUANTITIES – SEE SHEETS Qnn and Wnn.”
Quantities for work items such as pigmented sealer, whose cost is included in the cost of the associated concrete, are shown in the plans for the sole purpose of aiding the contractor in the bidding process and are to be accompanied by the note, “Informational Only.”

Page 4-24
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans
When calculating quantities for surfacing and paving materials to ensure reasonable accuracy, the Design Manual contains units and conversion factors for estimating surfacing and paving quantities.
Quantities listed in the Summary of Quantities are intended to be representative of the work to be performed. Each time a quantity is placed on a Quantity Tabulation sheet, a Profile sheet, or another location in the plans round it according to the following section according to the unit bid price. Show the total of the rounded quantities on the Summary of Quantities. 400.06(5)(f)
Rounding of Quantities
Apply the following general rules to the rounding of quantities: 1. Items having an estimated unit price of $9.99 or less: show to the highest multiple of 10; for example, 3,640 (not 3,637) units of haul at $0.50, and 560 (not 554) tons of ballast at $1.25. 2. Items with an estimated unit price of $10.00 to $99.99: show to the nearest full digit; for example, 61 (not 60.5) cubic yards of concrete at $43.00. 3. Items with an estimated unit price of $100.00 or more: show to one decimal place; for example, 18.3 (not 18.25) acres of clearing at $1500.00. 4. Exceptions to numbers 1, 2, and 3 above: • Round earthwork items, roadway excavation, embankment compaction, and borrow excavations to the nearest multiple of 10 units, regardless of price. Round roadway excavation and embankment compaction for each entry on the Profile sheets. Round borrow quantities to the nearest 10 units and place on the Summary of Quantities. On a new construction project with extremely large earthwork quantities, the quantities could even be rounded to the nearest 50 units at each entry on the Profile sheets. • Round HMA and crushed surfacing items to the nearest 10 units. • Round pipe items to the nearest foot for each pipe run entered on the Structure Note sheets, regardless of price. 400.06(5)(g)
Unit Bid Prices
Good sources to use for determining the estimated unit bid prices for quantities are Bid Tabs
Pro and Unit Bid Analysis. See the following:  wsdot.wa.gov/engineering-standards/design-topics/engineering-applications/unit-bidanalysis  wsdot.wa.gov/engineering-standards/design-topics/engineering-applications/technicalsupport-guidance

400.06(6)
Contract Reclamation Plans
See Contract Plan Example 4-10.
A Contract Reclamation Plan will clearly set forth all reclamation work to be accomplished in the contract.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-25 Contract Plans
Division 4
A Contract Reclamation Plan is required for every WSDOT contract that contains a WSDOT furnished-material source. The Contract Reclamation Plan will be based on the Ultimate
Reclamation Plan (ultimate REC plan). A reproducible (reverse-reading Mylar) of the approved ultimate REC plan can be obtained from the Region Materials Laboratory. This plan will be modified to create a Contract Reclamation Plan, which will be included in the Contract Plans.
By RCW 78.44, the approved ultimate REC plan must be followed or WSDOT is subject to fines for each incident. If the contract work requires deviation from the ultimate REC plan, a modification to the ultimate REC plan has to be submitted for Department of Natural Resources (DNR) approval prior to beginning work at the site.
In some cases, Contract Reclamation Plans need to be developed during Contract Plan preparation for sites that do not have ultimate REC plans. Materials sources located on federal land or sites smaller than 3 acres in area usually do not have ultimate REC plans. 400.06(6)(a)

Contract Reclamation Plan Elements 1. Update the existing contour lines shown on the approved Ultimate Reclamation Plan when to show the topography as it exists immediately prior to the contract. Only the contours in the portion of the site affected by your project need be shown, not for the entire site. 2. Note the contractor’s designated work area. 3. Indicate the available raw material, or, when appropriate, add a note on the plan stating that sufficient raw material is available for the project. 4. A block detailing materials to be produced and reclamation items needed under this contract. 5. The interim and reclaimed slopes are to be no steeper than the slopes on the ultimate REC plan. 6. Note specific directions for excavation; for example, “Excavation shall progress to full depth from the existing face of excavation toward the southeast.” 7. Only notes on the ultimate REC plan that are applicable to work being performed under the contract are to be included on the Contract Reclamation Plan. 8. Other notes and information necessary to the specific contract will be added. It is the intent that the Contract Reclamation Plan stand alone for the work (reclamation) to be accomplished under the contract. 400.06(6)(b)
Contract Materials
Verify with the Region Materials Laboratory that the quantity of available material is accurate and that it is possible to produce all the materials listed within WSDOT specifications. If the contractor will be required to perform some special or extra work to manufacture material that meets the specifications, include the special or extra work requirements in the Special
Provisions.
Page 4-26
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans
Tabulate quantities for stripping, clearing, and grubbing, and all other items of work to be performed within a site on the plan. For a nonmandatory site, the items of work are to be site-specific (“Clearing and Grubbing – Site QS-A-495”). For a mandatory site, the work will fall under the general contract work item (“Clearing and Grubbing”), but will be shown in a separate column.
Identification numbers for stockpile and waste sites are assigned by the Region Materials
Laboratory. Although a Contract Reclamation Plan is not required for stockpile or waste sites, the plans are to indicate any restrictions on the use of such sites.
Show Access to the sites. If an access road is to be built, rebuilt, or widened, indicate the width of right of way, and clearly identify all work to be performed by the contractor on the access roads as a part of the contract. How the contractor will be paid for the access road work will be outlined in the Contract Provisions.
Agreements are required with the owners of all roads that make up the haul route. These agreements will indicate WSDOT’s and the contractor’s responsibilities for returning the roadway to the “before hauling” condition.

400.06(7)
Roadway Sections
See Contract Plan Examples 4-11, 4-12, 4-13, 4-14, 4-15, and 4-16.
Roadway sections are to provide complete geometric information on the roadway cross section from the subgrade up and general information left and right of centerline. The information on the roadway sections will tie directly to the Paving Plans and the profiles if these series of plans are included in the project.
On federal-aid projects, show future paving and surfacing depths required to bring the roadway to the ultimate design cross section, in order to qualify for future participation by the
FHWA.
Roadway sections are required for every combination of surfacing and paving depths used on the main line, ramps, detours, frontage roads, road approaches, city streets, and so on.
Consider the use of tables with a section example in order to reduce the number of unnecessary plan sheets.
Roadway sections are to represent conditions from the subgrade up for the entire length of the construction line(s) (such as main line, ramps, detours, frontage roads, road approaches, and city streets) included in the project. Start at the beginning station on an alignment and identify all stationing to the end of line without gaps/overlaps.
When drawing roadway sections, use proportional scaling to indicate lane widths and depths of materials to be placed. A 12-foot lane should be drawn so that it appears slightly larger than a 10-foot shoulder. A 0.15-foot lift of hot mix asphalt (HMA) should be drawn so that it appears approximately one quarter the thickness of a 0.60-foot lift of gravel base course.

WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-27 Contract Plans
Division 4
For constructability, the following dimensioning guidance is typically considered adequate. •
Horizontal elements, lane, and shoulder widths – show in feet. If a horizontal dimension is to the nearest foot, then show the dimension as a whole number. Example: show an 11-foot lane as 11’ not 11.0’. Show an 11.6’ lane as 11.6’ (do not round it to 12’.) •
Station limits – round to the nearest foot when practicable. But, if the roadway section goes to the bridge seat, use the bridge seat station. •
Materials depths – generally shown to hundredth of foot, as in: 0.25’
Draw roadway sections to reflect how the work is expected to be performed in the field. If HMA is to be placed in multiple lifts, draw the roadway section to reflect this fact by showing the number of lifts with the required depths of each lift. Show each lift with an edge line that would indicate where each lift would end left and right of centerline. DO NOT simply draw each lift of
HMA to extend out into the shoulder unless this is exactly how the HMA is to be placed.
Variable dimensions (for example, Varies 2' to 10') may be used to represent differences in shoulder or lane widths, or transition areas, only if there is a Paving Plan that clearly shows, by stationing, the actual widths desired. If the project is a pavement overlay project and no Paving
Plan is going to be provided, the use of variable horizontal dimensions is discouraged unless construction notes or a table is used to describe, by stationing, where the variable paving widths or transitions begin and end.
A generic roadway section for bridges must be provided to avoid having gaps in stationing. If the bridge is being overlaid, additional detail will be required; be sure the roadway section matches any bridge information in the plans. When a project has a structure on the main line or a secondary line that is not included in the project, a paving exception should be noted on the
Roadway Section sheet.
Show bridge approach slabs, if required, as a separate roadway section.
Station equations, paving exceptions, and project exceptions are to be shown in proximity to the roadway section to which they apply. 400.06(7)(a)

Roadway Section Items
Show the following on roadway sections as applicable: 1. Horizontal dimensions of the roadways. 2. Project-specific design details and required features such as curbs, sidewalks, or riprap. 3. The depths of surfacing and paving. 4. Station-to-station limits for each line represented by the roadway section. 5. The position of the profile grade, the pivot point for super transition, and the construction centerline. 6. The depth from profile grade to the roadway surface being constructed if the project does not include ultimate design surfacing. Label this depth as “Future.”
Page 4-28
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans 7. The type, width, and thickness of the existing surface if the characteristics of the existing surface will affect construction. 8. A general note indicating that all surfacing and paving depths are compacted depths. 9. A slope table if embankment and excavation heights vary enough to require different slope rates. Show sideslopes for embankment sections and foreslopes and backslopes for excavation areas. 10. A section showing shoulder widening for guardrail. If shoulder widening for guardrail is isolated to one or two roadway sections, it can be shown as part of the particular section. If shoulder widening for guardrail applies to several roadway sections, a separate shoulderwidening section can be drawn and referenced from the applicable roadway sections. 11. A section showing the shoulder design on the outside of a curve (super elevation section) if the project involves constructing subgrade on the outside of curves (a standard CAD detail that need only be shown once). 12. A surfacing legend on each sheet indicating the type of surfacing material, with the exact item name as found on the Summary of Quantities. For HMA, it is necessary to indicate the class of material used, but not the performance grade (PG), when only one grade is used for the entire project. However, if there are two or more performance grades used on the project, they must all be detailed on the roadway sections. Assign each type of material an identifying number enclosed by a hexagon symbol. 13. Construction notes numbered consecutively. Only show the applicable construction notes on a particular sheet. Once you have created a construction note 1, it will always be the same for that series. Continue the sequencing of construction notes consecutively as you add them. DO NOT resequence from one plan sheet to the next. For example: • Sheet R1 may have construction notes 1, 2, 3, and 4. • Sheet R2 may have construction notes 1, 3, and 5. (Notes 1 and 3 on sheet R2 would be identical to notes 1 and 3 on sheet R1, and note 5 on R2 is a new note, consecutively numbered). 14. If the total paving depth for a class of HMA exceeds the nominal compacted depth specified in the Standard Specifications, one of the following methods of indicating the paving requirements will be used: • Draw multiple lifts on the roadway section indicating the desired minimum compacted depth of each lift. • Provide a construction note for the roadway section specifying the number of lifts required and that the maximum allowable compacted depth for any lift shall be in accordance with Section 5-04 of the Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and
Municipal Construction.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-29 Contract Plans 400.06(7)(b)
Division 4
Paving Depths

The plans supersede the Standard Specifications. If the roadway sections do not indicate the maximum paving depths, the contractor could use thicker paving lifts than allowed in the
Standard Specifications. Using one of the two methods above ensures the maximum lift thickness will not exceed the requirements of Standard Specification Section 5-04.3(7). If the total paving depth is less than the maximum nominal compacted depths shown in the Standard
Specifications, the use of the two methods above is optional.
Lifts need to comply with minimum lift thicknesses in addition to maximum lift thicknesses.
Minimum lift thickness for each class of HMA are found in Section 8.2.3 of the WSDOT
Pavement Policy available here:  https://wsdot.wa.gov/engineering-standards/construction-materials/pavement-designmanagement
Page 4-30
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4 400.06(8)
Contract Plans
Grading Sections

See Contract Plan Example 4-17.
These plan sheets show items such as: types of embankment; use of waste in slope flattening; drainage layers; composite sections; relief ditch details; slope tables; unsuitable stripping depth tables; controlled blasting slopes; wetland sections; horizontal drain details; surcharge details; large unsuitable foundation excavation and backfill areas; and soil stabilization details. Most projects will not require grading sections. 400.06(9)
Alignment Plan or Alignment/Right of Way Plan
See Contract Plan Examples 4-18 and 4-19.
The alignment and right of way (R/W) information will appear on the same series of plan sheets for most projects.
To reduce the number of plans sheets, include Right of Way Plans only when they are necessary for contractors to perform their work.
If R/W information is not required (such as for a paving project), the alignment information could be shown on another plan series, such as the Site Preparation Plan series or the Paving
Plan series, as long as the additional information does not cause overcrowding of the plan sheet.
Site preparation information may appear with the Alignment Plans, but only if there is minimal existing topography and minimal site preparation work to be shown. If there is considerable topography or a great deal of site preparation work to be shown, the information is to be placed on a separate plan series.
Note: If Roadway Profile sheets are included in the project, make sure the station limits on each
Profile Plan sheet match exactly the station limits of the Alignment Plan sheets. The alignment and profile may be shown on the same plan sheet. For general information on Roadway Profile sheets, see Section 400.06(12). 400.06(9)(a) Alignment/Right of Way Plan Series
The following information will normally appear on the Alignment/Right of Way Plan series: 1. Construction centerlines for all roadways being constructed. 2. All stationing, bearings, and curve data associated with each construction centerline. For new construction, ramp stationing will always run in the same direction as the main line stationing. 3. Right of way centerline—not always required (see discussion below). 4. Right of way lines. All WSDOT R/W Boundary Lines (proposed and existing), without exception, will always be solid lines on the Contract Plans. 5. Ties of all right of way breaks to either the right of way or construction centerlines—show both station and offset distance. 6. Construction permits with private citizens, and all easements, identified by type and use.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 4-31 Contract Plans
Division 4 7. Ties of all construction permits and all easements to either the right of way or construction centerline—show both station and offset distance. 8. Township and Range Lines that cross centerline, with appropriate descriptive information (such as bearing and distance to found corners), including centerline stationing at intersection point. 9. Limited access hachures when appropriate. Hachures need to be drawn to the correct stationing, but the stationing of the ends or breaks in limited access does not have to be identified on the construction plans. 10. Found Section Corners and monuments, with station and offset ties to construction centerline. 11. Station and offset ties to railroads and railroad rights of way that intersect the project or are affected by the project. 12. Corporate limit and county lines with station identification where they cross the construction centerline. 13. Names of rivers, streams, bays, and inlets, their direction of flow and meander lines, and the ordinary high tide or high-water lines of navigable waterways and any required environmental information for right of way plans. See 400.06(18) for additional requirements. 14. On all projects that include grading, show the slope catch lines. It may be desirable to show slope catch lines on the Drainage Plan; however, if this is done, the right of way line must also be shown on the Drainage Plan. 15. The outline of sand drainage blankets, unsuitable foundation excavation, and toxic waste excavation areas. 16. Show all found property corners along WSDOT R/W lines with a note stating “Per RCW 58.09.130, any monument or corner disturbed by the Contractor’s operation shall be replaced at no cost to the Contracting Agency.” 17. Primary Control Point – Primary control points are displayed in their coordinate location and labeled with the designation ID only. The primary control point table and basis of bearing content will be on the first sheet or the first sheet that can accommodate both without obscuring pertinent sheet information (see Example 4-19). 18. Show all wells (including decommissioned wells) on the alignment plans. Include the unique well identification tag and the well location in assigned project coordinates. See Section 700.01(8)(a) Decommissioning of Wells. 19. Add boring locations (symbol). 400.06(9)(b)
Right of Way Centerline
When the right of way centerline is coincidental with the construction centerline, provide an equation at the Begin Project and End Project to show the relationship between the official right
Page 4-32 Division 4
Contract Plans of way stationing and the construction centerline stationing. Provide an equation showing the relationship between the construction centerline and the right of way centerline at the location of Right of Way Plan equations. All right of way offsets and associated stationing will then be referenced to the construction centerline.
When the right of way centerline is not coincidental with the construction centerline, the same procedure described in the previous paragraph may be used. Show the offset distance between the right of way and construction centerlines at the Begin Project and End Project. In addition to the equations at the Begin Project and End Project, show equations at all points where the right of way and construction centerlines cross and at the location of Right of Way Plan equations. 400.06(9)(c)
Right of Way Stationing/Alignment
The official Right of Way Plans may be included in the Contract Plans under the following circumstances: • The official right of way stationing runs the opposite direction of the construction stationing. • The right of way alignment is substantially different than the construction alignment and is not easily tied. For example, the right of way alignment has numerous curves that do not exist in the construction centerline and the right of way would have to be described using metes and bounds as opposed to offsets from the construction centerline.
In either of the two circumstances above, contact the HQ Right of Way Plans Section and request that it prepare the existing Right of Way Plans to be included in the Contract Plans.
Provide the HQ Right of Way Plans Section with the equation relating the Begin Project and End
Project construction centerline to the existing R/W stationing. If this option is used, the HQ Right of Way Plans Section needs to be notified early in the design process so that the work can be added to its schedule, to ensure the plans can be prepared within the PS&E schedule. 400.06(9)(d)

Roadway Alignment/Right of Way Plan
Township and Range information does not have to be shown on the Alignment Plans unless one or both of the following cases occurs: • The Township or Range Lines cross the centerline, in which case show the line with the station of the centerline intersection identified. • Right of way boundary lines are shown WITH dimensions from the roadway alignment.
Section Lines only have to be shown on the Alignment Plans if the Section Corners are found, requiring that the ties to centerline be shown.
Show the following information for all horizontal alignments: 1. Line identification, using alpha designation and stationing (M 5+50). 2. Station ticks shown on the top side of the alignment line—top as related to the direction of the stationing. 3. Tangent bearings.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-33 Contract Plans
Division 4 4. Point of intersection (PI), point of curvature (P.C.), point of tangency (P.T.), point on tangent (POT), point on curve (POC), point of compound curve (PCC), point of reverse curve (PRC) and point on semi tangent (POST) for all horizontal alignments where applicable. 5. Angle points (A.P.) in horizontal alignments. 6. Curve data box showing: •
Station of the point of intersection (P.I.) of bearings for each curve. •
Delta for each curve: deflection angle between intersecting bearings. •
Radius of each curve.

•
Tangent length for each: distance from P.C. and P.T. to the P.I.
Length of curve for each curve: distance from P.C. to P.T. along the horizontal curve.
Full super rate for each horizontal curve. 400.06(9)(e)
Construction Stationing
Show construction stationing increasing from the beginning of the project to the end, from south to north on odd-numbered highways, and from west to east on even-numbered highways.
All ramp stationing for new construction is to increase in the same direction as the main line stationing.
Ramp stationing should begin at station 10+00 to avoid negative stationing due to alignment changes.
Show offset equations as follows: • The secondary line (ramp, crossroad, or right of way centerline) designation and station is listed first. • The main line (construction centerline) designation and station, perpendicular distance, and left or right is listed next. The direction (left or right) is referenced from main line looking ahead on line. 400.06(9)(f)
Linear Equations

Linear equations should not be an issue if construction stationing is established for the project instead of using right of way stationing. If linear equations are present, make sure that they are gap equations and not overlap equations. Overlap equations cause confusion because of the duplication of stationing caused by the overlap. To convert an overlap equation to a gap equation, a 1 can be added in front of the Ahead station (5+00 would become 15+00), or the first digit of the Ahead station can be increased by 1 (110+00 would become 210+00).
Page 4-34
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans
Examples: 1. Overlap equation 10+00 BK = 5+00 AHD adding 1 in front of the Ahead station would become
Gap equation 10+00 BK = 15+00 AHD 2. Overlap equation 150+00 BK = 110+00 AHD add 1 to the first digit of the Ahead station would become
Gap equation 150+00 BK = 210+00 AHD
When showing the equation in the plans, the BACK station goes on the back-side of the equation line and the AHEAD station goes on the ahead-side of the equation line. 400.06(10)
Quantity Tabulation Plan Sheets
See Contract Plan Examples 4-20 and 4-38.
Quantity Tabulation Plan sheets are used to tabulate the locations, quantities, and notes pertaining to specific bid items. Quantity Tabulation Plan sheets may not be required on projects where the information is shown elsewhere in the contract. 400.06(10)(a) Quantity Tabulation Plan Sheet Items
The following types of items will normally appear on Quantity Tabulation sheets: 1. Removal items—except items paid by lump sum. 2. Asphalt concrete curb and asphalt concrete gutter. 3. Timber and lumber—except bridge items. 4. Cement concrete approach. 5. Cement concrete curbs, and curb and gutter. 6. Guardrail items, including anchors, terminals, and transition items. 7. Concrete barrier items. 8. Impact attenuators. 9. Guideposts. 10. Raised pavement markers, paint lines, and pavement marking items. 11. Conduit pipe—except bridge, illumination, and traffic signal system items. 12. Wildlife reflectors. 13. Steel reinforcing bars and wire mesh—except bridge structural retaining walls and drainage items. 14. Monument cases and covers. 15. Cement concrete sidewalk. 16. Asphalt concrete sidewalk.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 4-35 Contract Plans
Division 4 17. Concrete slope protection. 18. Fencing items, including gates and end, corner, and pull posts. 19. Adjustment items. 20. Delineation lights. 21. Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Devices. 400.06(10)(b) Quantity Tabulation Plan Sheet Preparation
Prepare Quantity Tabulation Plans on 11-inch by 17-inch sheets. The Quantity Tabulation spreadsheet program is available through the Region Plans Offices or the HQ Project
Development Unit. For additional information and instructions for the Quantity Tabulation spreadsheet, see the Appendices.
Standard sheets have been prepared with the heading “Quantity Tabulation.” A descriptive addition (see types of items above) may be added after the plan sheet heading “QUANTITY
TABULATION – XXXXXXX XXXXXX” to indicate what type of work is included on this plan sheet.
Place Quantity Tabulation Plan sheets immediately preceding the plan sheets that contain the tabulated items. This will intersperse them throughout the plans.
For projects involving only a few items, the quantities may be placed in data boxes on appropriate plan sheets or on Profile sheets, eliminating the need for Quantity Tabulation Plan sheets. Data boxes should be laid out in the same manner as the Quantity Tabulation sheets.
Provide blank columns between listed bid items, and blank rows in station listing (about every fifth entry and a space or two between each reference sheet listed). This procedure allows for the addition of bid items and stationing with ease, even during the addendum phase. 400.06(10)(c)
Bid Items

Place Bid items from left to right in the same order in which they appear in the Summary of
Quantities Estimate.
Identify bid items on the Quantity Tabulation Plan sheets exactly as they appear in the Standard
Specifications (spelling, punctuation, spacing, and so on) and in the same order as they appear on the Summary of Quantities.
If there are more bid items to be tabulated than will fit across the top of the sheet, with the appropriate blank spaces, additional Quantity Tabulation Plan sheets will be required. The station listing will be identical for the continued sheets. Likewise, if there are more station listings than will fit on a single sheet, with the required blank spaces, additional Quantity
Tabulation Plan sheets will be required. The bid items across the top will be identical for the continued sheets.
Each time an item is used in a different location provide a separate quantity entry. Related items, however, may be included in a single entry if the station limits are the same. For example, a single entry could include the type of guardrail, required anchors, and transition types.
Page 4-36
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans

Round each quantity entered on the Quantity Tabulation Plan sheet appropriately at the time of entry. Do not add up the unrounded quantities and round the total to carry forward to the
Estimate/Summary of Quantities. (See the information on rounding in 400.06(5), Summary of
Quantities.)
The bid item totals on the Quantity Tabulation sheets must be consistent with the bid item totals entered in the Summary of Quantities Estimate. 400.06(10)(e)
Plan Reference No.
The Code column contains the Quantity Tabulation code number, which is made up of the Plan
Reference No. and the number identifying the individual construction feature on the sheet (for example, P1-1, P1-2, … P1-6, P2-1, P2-2, … P2-26). List the numbers in ascending order of plan sheets.
Bid items, identified by station(s) and quantity or quantities, on individual Quantity Tabulation
Plan sheets are tied directly to the plan sheet series they are related to by the number immediately following the Plan Reference No. mentioned above. The related series sheet is to have its own consecutive series of numbers identifying construction features (octagonal enclosed numbers beginning with number 1) in the top left corner of the sheet and progressing across and down the sheet. Draw a light, arrowless line from the octagon to the construction feature. When a construction feature is continued on more than one sheet, divide the octagon on the continued sheet with a horizontal line. Insert the Plan Reference No. on which the construction feature first appears in the upper half and show the first sheet individual identifying number in the lower half. If this is done, a larger-scale octagon may be used. The octagonal symbol is not used for any other purposes.
For items such as pavement markings that are continuous for the entire project, list the station limits and leave the code column blank. 400.06(10)(f) General Notes
The General Notes will include information required to complete the data for a particular construction feature, such as: • Guidepost type and color. • Guardrail placement case, terminal connection, alternate anchor type, and connection type when connecting transition to stiffer barrier like bridge rail. • Acceptable impact attenuators for each location. • References to applicable Special Provisions identify the Special Provision by the exact name. • References to applicable details in the Contract Plans. Identify the exact plan sheet (using the Plan Reference No.) where the detail is located. • Reference to applicable Standard Plan(s). Provide the Standard Plan number, which is located in the bottom right corner of the page. • Type of curbing to be used.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 4-37 Contract Plans
Division 4
If the quantities for an item appear on other plan sheets in addition to the Quantity Tabulation
Plan sheets, provide cross-references to the sheets where the additional quantities can be found. 400.06(11)
Site Preparation
See Contract Plan Example 4-21.
The Site Preparation Plan series is where all existing topography within your project limits is to be shown, as well as all the project removal and demolition work.
If there is very little topography to be shown and very little removal and demolition work to be performed, this information can be shown on the Alignment/Right of Way Plan series as long as it does not compromise the information required on the Alignment/Right of Way Plans.
Show construction centerlines on the Site Preparation Plans; however, lanes, shoulders, and other features being constructed are not to be shown.
Identify removal and demolition of existing features, paid as separate items, using the General
Notes in the Quantity Tabulation sheets.
Identify items included in the lump sum price for “Removal of Structures and Obstructions,” with notes located directly on the appropriate plan sheet. For example, removal of wire fence should be identified with a note such as “wire fence to be removed.” Items of work (such as removal of guideposts) included in the lump sum price for “Removal of Structures and
Obstructions” that cover the entire project do not have to be identified on the plan. Items of work being paid as "Removal of Structures and Obstructions" will not appear on Quantity
Tabulation sheets.
If large, complete areas of pavement, sidewalk, or curbs and gutters are being removed, it is best not to use cross-hachuring to identify these areas. Large areas of cross-hachuring detract from the plans and often hide important information. It will suffice to show the limits of the removal and identify the area with a General Note on the Quantity Tabulation sheet, or note on the plan sheet “begin pavement removal/end pavement removal.” If there are a number of small, isolated areas of pavement removal, cross-hachuring may be used to identify these areas.

400.06(12)
Roadway Profiles
See Contract Plan Example 4-22.
Roadway profiles are required only when there is a change in the vertical alignment of the roadway under construction. If only a section of the vertical alignment is changed, a profile is required only for that section.
The station-to-station limits shown on each Profile sheet match exactly the station-to-station limits shown on the corresponding Alignment sheet. 400.06(12)(a)
Profile Sheets
Show the following required information on Profile sheets:
Page 4-38
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans

1. Roadway section limits with arrows. These are always to be the topmost entry on the Profile sheets. 2. Super elevation diagrams. These should be shown on a separate sheet if they cause crowding of other required information. 3. The finished profile grade line as specified in the EEDS Manual. 4. The datum symbol and information on all sheets. North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 88 is the desirable vertical datum. However, National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 29 is acceptable in certain situations. If there is a need to use NGVD 29 datum on a project, contact the HQ Right of Way Plans Section, Land Survey Support, for concurrence for use. 5. All vertical control, including benchmarks that exist in the area of the alignment profiled on the sheet—both temporary and permanent. Include all pertinent information associated with vertical control points such as location, offset, stationing, elevation, and so on. 6. Beginning station and elevation (BVC) and ending station and elevation (EVC) of each vertical curve. 7. Elevations and stations through each vertical curve on even stations, or to avoid cluttering at even station intervals not greater than 200 feet. 8. Station and elevation of the point of intersection of the gradients (VPI). 9. Gradients between vertical curves—shown as a percentage, carried out to a sufficient number of places (generally three) so that the calculation from the elevation at one VPI on the given gradient will give the elevation at the next VPI. 10. Length of each vertical curve. 11. Elevation and station at each break—angle point; AP—in gradient with elevation shown to
0.01 foot. 12. Existing ground shown as a dashed line. 13. Areas of work or quantities, with arrows, between the station-to-station limits of the work, or at 10 station (1,000') totals if the work extends beyond 10 station totals, or at other logical breaks such as bridges or group breaks. If these logical breaks are slightly more or less than 1,000 feet apart, it would be appropriate to have a 1,300-foot total or a 700-foot total. 14. Quantities, including but not limited to roadway excavation; controlled blasting; vertical sand drains; unsuitable foundation excavation; toxic waste excavation; embankment compaction; special backfill; clearing and grubbing; seeding; compost; topsoil; and fertilizing and mulching. 15. The use of the term “embankment” by itself is permitted only when Method A compaction is specified. In this instance, it must be noted that embankment quantities are shown for informational purposes only. 16. Details showing sideslopes for unsuitable foundation excavation and toxic waste excavation (or detailed on separate sheets.) The bottom of unsuitable foundation excavation and toxic
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-39 Contract Plans
Division 4 waste excavation should be shown as a squiggly line to indicate that the actual bottom elevation of the excavation is unknown.
Give some thought to the layout of the Profile sheets prior to placing information, because the layout is to be the same on each Profile sheet in the series. Place all quantity arrows in the same position on each sheet to allow quantities to be located easily.
If there is only minor grading on the project, and Profile sheets are not used, show 10 station totals, or similar quantity breakdowns, on a Quantity Tabulation sheet. 400.06(13)
Structure Notes
See Contract Plan Examples 4-23 and 4-28.
All of the information shown on the Structure Note sheet and the Drainage Plans and Profiles will meet the requirements contained in the Hydraulics Manual and the Standard Plans for
Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction (Standard Plans). (a) Structure Note sheets are used to tabulate locations, bid items, quantities, and notes pertaining to drainage items, utilities, water lines, and so on. (b) Prepare Structure Notes as 11-inch by 17-inch sheets. The Structure Note spreadsheet is available through Region Plans Offices or the HQ Project Development Unit. For additional information and instructions for this microcomputer spreadsheet, see the Appendices. (c) Standard sheets have been prepared with the heading “Structure Notes.” Insert a descriptive addition such as “Utilities” or “Irrigation” after the heading “STRUCTURE NOTES – XXXXXXX XXXXXX” to indicate what type of work is included on the plan sheet. Place
Structure Note sheets immediately preceding the plan sheets that contain the features being tabulated. (d) For those projects involving only a few drainage bid items at a few locations, the information normally provided on Structure Note sheets may be provided on the appropriate plan sheets, in either a tabular form in data boxes, or placed in a convenient location on the sheet, with a leader line used to connect the information with the corresponding drainage feature. (e) Provide blank columns between listed bid items, and blank rows in station listing—about every fifth entry and a space or two between each reference sheet listed. This allows for the addition of bid items and stationing with ease, even during the addendum phase. (f) Place bid items from left to right in the same order in which they appear in the Summary of
Quantities Estimate.
Identify bid items on the Structure Note Plan sheets exactly (spelling, punctuation, and spacing) as they appear in the WSDOT Standard Item Table. (g) If there are more bid items to be tabulated than will fit across the top of the sheet, with the appropriate blank spaces, additional tabulation sheets will be required. The station listing will be identical for the continued sheets. Likewise, if there are more station listings than

Page 4-40
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans will fit on a single sheet, with the required blank spaces, additional tabulation sheets will be required. The bid items across the top will be identical for the continued sheets. (h) Each time an item is used in a different location, provide a separate quantity entry. Related items, however, may be included in a single entry if the station limits are the same. For example, a single entry could include a catch basin, pipe, structure excavation, and riprap. (i) Round each quantity entered on the Structure Note Plan sheet at the first point of entry.
Do not add up the unrounded quantities and then round the total to carry forward to the
Summary of Quantities Estimate. (See appropriate rounding information in 400.06(5).) (j) The Code column is to contain the structure code number, which is made up of the Plan
Reference No. and the number identifying the drainage features on the sheet (for example,
D1-1, D1-2, … D1-6, D2-1, D2-2, … D2-26). List the numbers in ascending order of plan sheets. (k) Indicate the construction centerline stationing on the Structure Note sheet for cross culverts, and indicate station and offset for each end of longitudinal pipe installations. If a sanitary or storm sewer line stationing is used, use its stationing on the Structure Note sheet, and the plan sheets will indicate the appropriate ties to the construction centerline. (l) The bid item for storm sewer pipe will be “Schedule ___Storm Sewer Pipe ___ In. Diam.” A table indicating the acceptable pipe alternates is included in Section 7-04 of the Standard
Specifications. There will be times when not all of the pipes shown as acceptable alternates in the table will be acceptable because of conditions on a specific project. When there are pipes not acceptable for a specific project, include a General Note on the Structure Note sheet identifying the unacceptable pipe type. The Hydraulics Manual contains a complete discussion on storm sewer pipes and is to be used for guidance. (m) When WSDOT does sanitary sewer pipe work, it is usually to extend or replace a system affected by the highway work. The utility or local agency will normally specify the type of pipe, or specify that the pipe extension or replacement be in kind. The system owner’s request for pipe type is to be placed in the P&SE portion of the Project File to serve as backup justification. The bid item will be the pipe type requested by the owner, and the
General Note on the Structure Note Plan sheet will read either “no acceptable alternates” or “replace in kind,” whichever is appropriate. (n) The General Notes will include information required to complete the data for a particular drainage feature, such as: • Acceptable or unacceptable pipe alternates for drain, underdrain, and culvert pipes. • Unacceptable alternates for culvert and storm sewer pipes bid on a schedule basis. • The appropriate treatment for pipes, except when the treatment is described by the bid item name. • The corrugation dimension for corrugated steel pipe when a size other than the standard size corrugation is required.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 4-41 Contract Plans
Division 4 • Specific vertical elongation where elliptical-shaped steel or aluminum pipes are required, whether the elliptical pipe is specified in the bid item or as an alternate. • Procedures or instructions necessary to complete construction of the drainage feature. • Required features, such as beveled end sections, safety bars, and other improvements. • References to applicable details in the Contract Plans. Identify the exact plan sheet using the Plan Reference No. where the detail is located. • References to applicable Standard Plans, with the full Standard Plan number. • References to applicable Special Provisions. Identify the Special Provision by the exact name.
The bid item totals on the Structure Note sheets must be consistent with the bid item totals entered in the Summary of Quantities Estimate. (o) If the quantities for an item appear on other plan sheets in addition to the Structure Note sheets, provide cross-references to the sheets where the additional quantities can be found. 400.06(14)
Drainage Plan
See Contract Plan Examples 4-24 and 4-27.
Each plan sheet will have its own consecutive series of numbers identifying drainage features.
The numbers (beginning with number 1 enclosed in circles) will begin in the top left corner of the sheet and progress across and down the sheet. Draw a light, arrowless line from the circle to the drainage feature or features. These numbers relate directly back to the Structure Note plan sheets.
When a drainage feature is continued on more than one sheet, divide the circle with a horizontal line. The plan sheet reference number on which the drainage feature first appears will be inserted in the upper half and the individual identifying number will be inserted in the lower half. A larger-scale circle may be used if this is done. The circle symbol is reserved for the purpose of identifying drainage features and is not to be used for any other purpose.
If a sanitary or storm sewer line stationing is used, indicate the appropriate ties to the construction centerline.
Each cross pipe will have a separate code number, which will include any attached drainage structure and any riprap, quarry spalls, or other end treatment being constructed in conjunction with the pipe.
Each run of pipe in a closed sewer system will have a separate code number, which will include the pipe and the drainage structure on the inlet end of the run of pipe.
If multiple pipes are to be placed in the same trench, they may be combined under a single structure code.
Indicate the skew angle for all skewed cross pipes, unless both ends are controlled by station and offset and the stations and offsets appear on the Structure Note sheet.

Page 4-42
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans
A roadway ditch that is shown as part of a roadway section does not need to be shown on the
Drainage Plans. This roadway ditch is included in the earthwork for Roadway Excavation Incl.
Haul; do not assign a Structure Note number.
When a ditch is constructed based on a drainage profile in the Drainage Plans, then this ditch needs an assigned Structure Note number and the excavation is included in the bid item Ditch
Excavation. This excludes ditches that are part of the roadway. 400.06(15)
Drainage Profiles
See Contract Plan Examples 4-25 and 4-26.
The established scale controls the drainage profiles vertically. There is usually no horizontal scale for the drainage profiles, but it is recommended that distances represented be drawn proportionately. Draw each profile in proportion horizontally for the length of the profile (the space representing 10 feet will appear the same for the length of the profile, and it will appear to be approximately two times a space, representing 5 feet).
The profiles can be made visually easier to follow by using an elongated triangle to represent manholes and an elongated rectangle to represent other drainage structures (such as catch basins or inlets). The distance shown between drainage structures is not the length of pipe but the horizontal distance from center of structure to center of structure. If it happens to appear to be the same as the length of pipe shown in the Structure Note Plan sheet, it is merely coincidental.
Draw pipe diameters with proportionate scale, so a 12-inch-diameter pipe will be drawn half the size of a 24-inch-diameter pipe.
Draw drainage profiles as a straight line representation of the path the water will take as it flows through the system, without regard for the actual plan view direction the pipes are running. You do not have to break the profile because a system that had been running parallel to the centerline has turned ninety degrees at a catch basin and crossed the roadway.
At locations where two or more pipes bring water to a drainage structure and one pipe carries the water away, there will have to be breaks in the profiles. One profile will continue through the common drainage structure and show the water leaving the structure, while the other profiles will stop or start at the common structure. Draw a leader line between the representations of the common drainage structure with the note “same catch basin,” which is the tie between the profiles and completes each without having to draw the exit pipe a number of times. The information for the common structure will only be shown on one profile, usually the one that shows the outlet pipe. 400.06(15)(a)

Drainage Profile Information
Provide the following information on the drainage profiles: 1. Inlet and outlet flow line elevations of pipes—shown below the pipe profile. Inlet and Outlet flow line elevations are those elevations derived from pipe slopes carried to the center of drainage structure.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-43 Contract Plans
Division 4 2. Outflow treatments such as riprap, quarry spalls, and, if the ditch is other than a roadway or median ditch, ditch profiles. 3. Debris deflectors, standpipes, and headwalls. 4. The type of drainage structure and station and offset location of the structure—shown above the structure. 5. The rim elevation of manholes, catch basins, inlets, or other drainage structures—shown above the structure. 6. The horizontal distance between adjacent drainage structures from center of structure to center of structure. 7. The size of pipe in each run—you do not have to include the type of pipe. 8. The pipe slope—carried out to sufficient decimal places (generally three) so that when the calculation is made from the indicated inlet flow line, on the given grade, for the given distance, the result will be the outlet flow line indicated to 0.01 foot. 9. Finished ground line above the pipe. 10. Original ground line if pipes will be placed prior to embankment construction or if original ground differs from the finished ground line. 400.06(16)
Utility Plan
See Contract Plan Example 4-29.
When the contractor is to work on the existing utilities as part of the contract, plan sheets for utility structure notes, plans, and details will be required. These follow the same general guidelines as specified for Drainage Structure Notes/Plans/Details.
To locate utilities in areas where only a few utilities exist, consider using tables with stations and offsets in lieu of creating additional plan sheets.
RCW 19.122.040 requires WSDOT to identify and locate known underground utilities in our contracts. Make every effort to also identify and locate aboveground utilities.
RCW 19.122.040 “Underground facilities identified in bid or contract – Excavator's duty of reasonable care – Liability for damages – Attorneys' fees,” reads as follows: (1) Project owners shall indicate in bid or contract documents the existence of underground facilities known by the project owner to be located within the proposed area of excavation.
The following shall be deemed changed or differing site conditions: (a) An underground facility not identified as required by this chapter or other provision of law; and (b) An underground facility not located, as required by this chapter or other provision of law, by the project owner, facility operator, or excavator if the project owner or excavator is also a facility operator. (2) An excavator shall use reasonable care to avoid damaging underground facilities. An excavator shall:

Page 4-44
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans (a) Determine the precise location of underground facilities which have been marked; (b) Plan the excavation to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground facilities in and near the excavation area; and (c) Provide such support for underground facilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such facilities. (3) If an underground facility is damaged and such damage is the consequence of the failure to fulfill an obligation under this chapter, the party failing to perform that obligation is liable for any damages. Any clause in an excavation contract which attempts to allocate liability, or requires indemnification to shift the economic consequences of liability, that differs from the provisions of this chapter is against public policy and unenforceable. Nothing in this chapter prevents the parties to an excavation contract from contracting with respect to the allocation of risk for changed or differing site conditions. (4) In any action brought under this section, the prevailing party is entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees. [2011 c 263 § 8; 1984 c 144 § 4.]
Identified utilities are to be shown in the bid or contract documents as stated in the RCW. The
Site Preparation Plan series is where they would normally be shown (see 400.06(11), Site
Preparation). If the project is in an area with many utilities, as well as many other topographical features, it may be necessary to separate the utilities on a separate series of plans following the
Site Preparation Plan series. The best available information as to the location of underground and overhead utilities is to be used. Contract Plan Example 4-19 depicts how utilities are typically shown on a plan sheet.
Do not forget to include WSDOT utilities, such as traffic signal, illumination, and ITS conduits and fixtures.
The required amount of detail related to utility location is directly proportional to the amount of underground work involved in the contract and the proximity to the utility. A simple paver should require less utility detail than a project with excavation at or near a 24-inch natural gas line or a 96-inch sewer line. 400.06(17)
Contour Grading Plan

Contour Grading Plans provide finished ground contours. These plans require the Region
Landscape Architect's stamp (or the HQ Landscape Architect's stamp for regions without a
Landscape Architect), regardless of whether they are prepared by the design team or the landscape section. (See the Design Manual for more information.)
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-45 Contract Plans 400.06(18)
Division 4
Wetlands, Mitigation Sites, Detention/Retention Site Plans and
Stream Plans 400.06(18)(a)
Wetlands
Show all wetlands on the construction plans, whether inside the right of way or not, that could be impacted by the construction work. Use standard symbols found in the Electronic
Engineering Data Standards Manual.
Wetlands within the right of way must be delineated in the field by a qualified wetland biologist and survey data collected. Delineated wetlands will, in most cases, have buffer zones associated with them. Construction contract plans must accurately show the location of wetlands and their buffers based on the survey data collected. Wetlands that are outside the right of way may have buffers that extend into the work areas shown on the construction contract plans. Impacts to buffers of off-site wetlands may result in indirect impacts to the wetland that reduces its functional value.
The buffer zone is established by the local jurisdiction and may not always be identified on the permit. For each wetland identified within a project area, check with the Region Environmental
Office to get the buffer zone information. The buffer zone is developed by adding the required buffer width to the surveyed wetland boundary.
If a contractor is allowed to work within an existing wetland or wetland buffer zone, delineate the allowable work area by the cut and fill line. The contractor shall possess a permit identifying each wetland in which work is allowed.
Show wetlands and their buffers on the Vicinity Map and all other construction contract plan sheets, such as those showing cut/fill lines, staging and stockpile locations, drainage, TESC, or other features that could impact them.
For further information, see the Roadside Policy Manual and the Environmental Manual Chapter
431 Wetlands. 400.06(18)(b)

Wetland Mitigation Sites
A wetland mitigation site is a wetland area that has been or is being established (created), restored, enhanced, or preserved to compensate for wetlands impacted by construction.
Show all wetland mitigation sites on the construction contract plans and identified as either “existing” or “to be constructed.” A mitigation site, whether existing or to be constructed, is always identified as a mitigation site on construction contract plan sheets. Wetlands in mitigation sites become subject to regulatory jurisdiction as soon as they are constructed.
If a contractor is allowed to work within an existing wetland mitigation site, delineate the allowable work area by the cut and fill line. The contractor shall possess a permit identifying each wetland in which work is allowed.
Contact RWPlans@wsdot.wa.gov with Township, Range, Section, State Route (SR), and
Mileposts (MP) of the project, to obtain copies of the Sundry Site Plans that show existing mitigation sites on record.
Page 4-46
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans 400.06(18)(c)
Detention/Retention Sites

Show all facilities related to the detention, retention, and treatment, filtration, or drainage of stormwater or surface water, whether existing or to be constructed, on the construction contract plans and labeled as Stormwater Treatment Areas. It is important to identify stormwater treatment areas so they will not be misconstrued to be wetlands or mitigation areas in the future. 400.06(18)(d) Stream Plans
See Contract Plan Examples 4-30, 4-31 and 4-32
When realigning or regrading a stream or river as part of the contract, a Stream Plan, Stream
Profile, and Stream Details are required. The Stream plan set requires the stamp of an Engineer from the HQ Hydraulics Office.
Show the following information on Stream Plan set: •
Stream slope breaklines, the limits of fill and or excavation, begin and end of channel grading, and the centerline of the new stream alignment, with stationing increasing from downstream to upstream. •
Existing contours and existing features shown outside of the perimeter of the new stream. If major roadway changes are proposed, new contours and features may be appropriate in lieu of the existing contours in the vicinity of the roadway. •
Large Woody Material (LWM), boulder clusters, and/or scour holes, if included in the stream design. The following note must be added to the Stream Plan if LWM is included: “LOCATIONS AND ORIENTATION OF LARGE WOODY MATERIAL (LWM)
STRUCTURES AS SHOWN ON THIS SHEET ARE APPROXIMATE AND WILL BE STAKED BY
THE ENGINEER.”

•
If a culvert is included in the design, show the inside width of the culvert and wing walls. Culvert details may be incorporated into the Stream Plan, Profile and Details series; however, this may require a dual stamped set of plan sheets as this work is not done by the HQ Hydraulics Office.
The stream profile sheets will show the new grade relative to the existing grade. The depth of the streambed material will be depicted, also the beginning and ending of walls, culverts, and grading.
Informational quantities for channel excavation, streambed sediment, streambed cobbles, boulder clusters, and LWM structures, as well as structure excavation, and shoring, when appropriate.
Stream Details will require stream sections drawn facing upstream and show the grading design for the stream. Provide slope and width of streambed slope breaks.
Provide an appropriate note for streambed material referencing the Special Provisions, for example: ‘SEE SPECIAL PROVISION “AGGREGATES FOR STREAMS, RIVERS, AND
WATERBODIES” FOR STREAMBED MATERIAL AND COARSENED STREAMBED MATERIAL.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-47 Contract Plans
Division 4

FINAL INSTALLATION WILL PROVIDE A WELL GRADED MIX OF STREAMBED SEDIMENTS
AND STREAMBED COBBLES.’ • 400.06(19)
If the project has large woody material, separate sections and anchoring details are required. If included in the design, show locations of slash and scour holes. The following note must be added to the LWM sections: “LOCATIONS AND ORIENTATION OF
LARGE WOODY MATERIAL (LWM) STRUCTURES AS SHOWN ON THIS SHEET ARE
APPROXIMATE AND WILL BE STAKED BY THE ENGINEER.
Paving/Pavement Marking Plan
See Contract Plan Examples 4-34, 4-35, and 4-39.
Paving and pavement marking information will normally be combined on a single series of plans.
If the project requires the paving information to be separate from the pavement marking information, the Paving Plan will show the total roadway and shoulder widths described by the roadway sections, not lane widths. The Pavement Marking Plans will show the lane configuration and widths. The information is not to be repeated on both series of plans.
The Paving/Pavement Marking Plan series may be necessary when the work cannot be shown adequately on the roadway sections. If the roadway sections adequately describe most of the project, only the areas requiring more detailed or specific information need be shown in
Paving/Pavement Marking Plans.
Pavement marking criteria is found in the Design Manual and the pavement marking applications are shown in the Standard Plans. Pavement marking layout information is not required in the plans if the required pavement markings are as shown in the Standard Plans.
Pavement marking quantities are to be tabulated on Quantity Tabulation sheets if not accurately shown elsewhere.
When Paving/Pavement Marking Plans are included, they will show all lane and shoulder widths, information on pavement taper lengths and widths, widening for guardrail, and the locations of concrete barrier, guardrail, impact attenuators, and traffic islands. The various areas and types of pavement marking will be identified by General Notes in the Quantity Tabulation sheets; if there is only minor pavement marking, the beginning and ending stations could be shown in the plan for each type in the area.
The only existing information that will appear on the Paving/Pavement Marking Plans will be the existing roadways and approaches beyond the point where the new construction begins or ends to show the tie between the new and existing. The “old” roadway and lane lines through the construction area are not to be shown.
If there is only minor drainage, signing, or illumination work on the project, it can be shown on the Paving/Pavement Marking Plans, provided it does not compromise the clarity of the paving and pavement marking information being shown.
Paving or pavement marking details showing the layout of traffic islands or other features (such as curb ramps) may need to be drawn at a larger scale on separate detail sheets to provide

Page 4-48
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans sufficient information or required dimensioning. These details will follow immediately after the
Paving/Pavement Marking Plan series. 400.06(20)
Plan Detail Sheet
See Contract Plan Example 4-36
Provide Plan Details sheets to help ensure the contractor has a clear picture of the work to be performed.
Organize plan details on plan sheets so they are grouped according to plan series. Place the detail sheets as the last set of plans in the plan series. For example, all of the drainage details will be grouped on the appropriate number of sheets and will become the last sheets in the
Drainage Plan series—normally following the drainage profiles.
It is important that details be complete, meaningful, and necessary. It is also important that details be drawn at a scale that will clearly show the information when placed on the 11-inch by 17-inch plan sheets.
Plan details are not to be a redrawn Standard Plan. Many times, however, it is necessary to draw details showing a project-specific modification to a Standard Plan. In these instances, sufficient detail is to be provided to indicate the modification, but all of the information on the Standard
Plan that is still applicable is not to be redrawn. Instead, a note stating “FOR INFORMATION NOT
SHOWN, SEE STANDARD PLAN X-XX” is to be included on the detail.
Details that are not associated with a Standard Plan must be complete, because the contractor is only obligated to provide what is shown on the detail.
The Electronic Engineering Data Standards Manual contains a number of generic or standard details found in the CAD system. Many of these details can be used as is, or they may be modified to fit requirements for a specific application. Use of these details can save both the designer and the CAD operator considerable time over developing and inputting details from scratch.

400.06(21)
Minor Structures
For projects with quantities for minor structures, such as nonstructural retaining walls (see
Section 8-24 of the Standard Specifications) or other like items of work, use one of the following methods to show these quantities in the plans in: • Show Quantities on Quantity Tabulation sheet(s). • Show Quantities in tabular form (in data boxes) on the individual plan sheet(s). 400.06(22)
Illumination Plan
See Contract Plan Example 4-40 and 4-41.
Illumination systems design criteria is found in the Design Manual.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-49 Contract Plans
Division 4

If the illumination work is minor adjustments to an existing system or the installation of a small system (one or two luminaires) at an intersection, it can often be shown on another series of plans. 400.06(22)(a)
Illumination Plan Information
The following information is required for Illumination Plans: 1. The location of light standards: new and existing. 2. The light standard number for new luminaires. 3. The location of the power source: whether new or existing. 4. The layout of the conduit and electrical circuitry. 5. The mounting height for new luminaires: for existing if being relocated. 6. The mast arm length for new luminaires: for existing if being relocated. 7. Base requirements, fixed or slip, for new luminaires: for existing if being relocated. 8. Conduit size and fill for new installation: for existing affected by, or affecting, the project. 9. Service cabinet requirements for new: or modifications to existing. 10. Junction box locations and types for new: for existing affected by, or affecting, the project. 11. Luminaire light source, distribution, and voltage for new luminaires. 12. All other features unique to the specific project. 400.06(22)(b)
Stationing and Offsets
Stationing and offsets, shown in the foundation schedule for light standard locations, are to be reasonably accurate to ensure the design light levels are achieved. 400.06(23)
Traffic Signal Plan
Traffic Signal Plans are normally provided by either the Region Traffic Office or the HQ Traffic
Office, and the designer simply incorporates them into the project. The Traffic Signal Plans will follow the guidelines in the Design Manual. 400.06(24)
Intelligent Transportation System Plan
See Contract Plan Example 4-42.
The Region Traffic Office normally provides Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) Plans, and the designer simply incorporates them into the project. ITS design criteria is found in the
Design Manual.
Provide the appropriate base maps to the HQ Traffic Office showing the locations of all new and existing features, such as utilities, drainage pipes, and structures, so that these features can be taken into account during the initial design. Keep the traffic designer aware of all design revisions made to the plans from the time the initial layout was given to the traffic designer.

Page 4-50
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans 400.06(25)
Sign Specification Plan Sheet
See Contract Plan Examples 4-43 and 4-44.
Prepare Sign Specification Plan sheets as 11-inch by 17-inch sheets plotted from CAD or an Excel program.
A separate Sign Specification Plan sheet will normally be prepared for the installation of new signs, the removal of signs, and the relocation of signs. If the signing work is minor, it is permissible to combine the different types of work on a single sheet, but there should be a distinct, identifiable section of the sheet for each type of work presented.
There will be a separate sign-numbering system for each of the three types of signing work, and each will be continuous from the beginning of the project to the end.
The Sign Specification Plan sheets are to be completely filled out.
Remember that the material stock used for the signs comes in 48-inch by 96-inch sheets, so sign sizes need to be adjusted to make the most efficient use of the stock material. The following guidelines should be used: •

For signs having a horizontal dimension of 48 inches or less, specify all dimensions in inches. •
For signs having a horizontal dimension of greater than 48 inches, specify all dimensions in feet and inches.
Wood posts are to be called out as nominal dimensions. A 4 x 4 (the common name for a 3-1/2" x 3-1/2" piece of lumber), 4 x 6, and so on, as long as there is no reference to inches.
When a sign installation requires multiple steel posts, specify which base type is to be used (see the Standard Plans for each multiple-post installation). 400.06(26)
Signing Plan
See Contract Plan Examples 4-45, 4-46, 4-47 and 4-48.
Signing design criteria is found in the Design Manual.
Signing will always be shown in a plan view; however, assess the need for the Signing Plan series. In many cases, there are not sufficient signs to require a separate series of plans. In these cases the signing information can be combined with another series, such as the
Paving/Pavement Marking Plan series, without affecting the clarity of the overall plan.
Signing Plans do not normally require a great deal of roadway detail. The centerline and edge of the roadway is normally all that is required for two-lane highways. For multilane highways, additional detail and roadway information may be required.
For region-wide signing projects, where an extensive area is covered, a smaller scale (even a strip map) can be used for directional sign placements. However, even in these instances, largerscale details may be required to show sign installations at intersections and other areas where there are numerous signs being installed in a small area.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 4-51 Contract Plans
Division 4
Signs will be located in the plans and identified using the plan sign number. For new installations, the plan sign number will be enclosed in an oval. The plan sign number for sign removals will be enclosed in a rectangle and “R-” will preceded the number. Sign relocations will show both the original and relocated locations of the sign and the plan sign number will be enclosed in a square. There will be a leader line from the plan sign number to the sign location.
Sign relocations will have two leader lines: a dashed line from the plan sign number to the original location and a solid line from the plan sign number to the relocated location.
Show the following on the Signing Plans: • Construction centerlines—all that is required for signing, such as destination and speed limit. • Basic roadway layout in areas where detail is required, such as intersections with considerable signing. • Sign locations. • Small-scale layout of directional and special signs, showing required details, such as where upper- and lower-case lettering is to be used, location of directional arrows, and so on.
Details may be placed on a separate sheet to avoid overcrowding of the plan. • Small-scale layout of standard control signs may be shown in the plans. This can be very helpful to both the contractor and the inspector. • Plan sign number with leader line pointing to sign location. • WSDOT Sign Fabrication code number adjacent to plan sign number. • Signs to be installed. • Signs to be removed. • Signs to be relocated. Show the sign locations for both the original, using a dashed leader line, and the relocated, using a solid leader line. • Power source for all illuminated signs. If the source is coincidental to an illumination or traffic signal system and shown on those plans, a construction note referencing the sheet where the source is identified will suffice. 400.06(27)
Signing Details
When overhead signs are being installed on a sign bridge or cantilever structure, show the following information on the Sign Specification and/or Sign Detail:
Page 4-52 •
Simple drawing of the new structure and signs

•
Distance between signs
Distance between signs and end supports or posts
Location of overhead signs in relation to lanes
Sign light spacing, when sign light(s) are required
Maintenance walkway position
Other data called for in the plans
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 4
Contract Plans 400.06(28)
Bridge Plan

Bridge Plans are prepared by the HQ Bridge and Structures Office. The designer may be required to provide field information for use by the HQ Bridge and Structures Office during the design.
Required data/guidelines are shown in the Design Manual.
Most projects with bridge construction will have items of work required because of the bridge work, but are indicated on the Bridge Plans as “not included in bridge quantities.” Provide the required PS&E information for these items.
Following are some of the items typically “not included in bridge quantities”: •
Drains •
Gravel backfill for drain •
Gravel backfill for wall •
Underdrain pipe behind or around abutments or walls •
Drain pipe in embankments at bridge ends •
Utility conduits and anchorage

•
Slope protection
Concrete barrier
Guardrail connections
The bridge designer will provide a list of items that are not included in the bridge work. 400.06(29)
Traffic Control Plan
See Contract Plan Examples 4-49 through 4-57.
As required in the highway administration rules and regulations (23 CFR 630 Subpart J), every project shall have a Transportation Management Plan (TMP) with a minimum requirement being a Temporary Traffic Control Plan or Traffic Control Plans (TCPs). The TCPs may be typical, sitespecific, or project-specific plans with a primary consideration for public safety, worker safety, and maintaining mobility for vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians (including pedestrians with disabilities) through or around a work zone. (See the Design Manual for further guidance.)
The Plan Sheet Library includes many typical TCPs to consider as a starting point for developing contract traffic control plans. The Work Zone Traffic Control Guidelines Manual for Maintenance
Operations, and figures in the MUTCD Part 6H have additional examples, though not specifically intended to contract use.
Contract TCPs need to provide a biddable and constructable method for managing road user impacts and completing the work. The contractor is required to adopt the contract plans in writing or develop their own for the engineer’s acceptance. Because of the complexity of balancing public and worker safety, maintaining a level of mobility and project constructability needs, TCPs need to be developed with a great deal of thought by a designer with an understanding of all the project features to be constructed, how they will be constructed, as well as an understanding of temporary traffic control principles and requirements. The TCP

WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 4-53 Contract Plans
Division 4 designer should be aware of any design changes to ensure the TCPs developed will still address all the project’s work zone impacts.
Bid item(s) need to be included for all devices shown on the TCPs and specific traffic control labor items like flaggers, Traffic Control Supervisor, and other traffic control labor. The standard specifications may need to be revised or supplemented with General Special Provision (GSPs) or project special provisions to include all items or revise standard item use. Review the TCPs to ensure all items required for traffic control and bidding are shown as either separate bid items or included in bid items for a lump sum bid if approved by the proper delegated authority. 400.07
Example Plan Sheets
This section provides examples of typical PS&E plan sheets showing general plan requirements.
These examples are strictly for informational purposes. Final approval of plan sheets will be in accordance with this manual and the Region Plans Review Office.
Page 4-54 INDEX (CONTINUED)
INDEX
SHEET
NO.

PLAN
REFERENCE 1 •2
IN1 - IN2 3
VP1
VICINITY MAP .
SQ
SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES .
RC
RECLAMATION PLAN 4 -17
RS1 • RS14

ROADWAY SECTION .
GS
GRADING SECTION .
SU
STAGING PLAN 18 • 25
AL1 • AL8
ALIGNMENT AND RIGHT OF WAY 26 • 27
QTSP1 • QTSP2
QUANTITY TABULATION • SITE PREPARATION 28 • 35
SP1 • SP8

SITE PREPARATION PLAN .
EU
EXISTING UTILITIES PLAN 36 • 44
RP1 • RP9
ROADWAY PROFILE .
QTEC
QUANTITY TABULATION -TESC 45 • 52
EC1 • EC8
TESC PLAN
SHEET
NO.

TITLE
PLAN
REFERENCE
INDEX .
IR
IRRIGATION PLAN .
IRRIGATION DETAIL .
LS
LANDSCAPE PLAN .
CN

INTERCHANGE CONTOUR PLAN 97 • 106
PV1 • PV10
PAVING PLAN .
PV
PAVING DETAIL 107 • 114
QTPM1 • QTPM8
QUANTITY TABULATION • PAVEMENT MARKING 115 • 124
PM1 • PM10
PAVEMENT MARKING PLAN .
PM

PAVEMENT MARKING DETAIL .
ST
MINOR STRUCTURES 125 -132
IL1-IL8
ILLUMINATION PLAN .
IL9
ILLUMINATION SCHEDULE .
ILLUMINATION DETAIL .
SG .
SG

133 • 134
TS3, TS7 .
TS
Notes to the Designers: .
EC
TESC DETAIL 53 • 62
NTDR1 • NTDT10
STRUCTURE NOTES • DRAINAGE 63 • 70
DR1 • DRS
DRAINAGE PLAN

71 • 86
DP1 • DP16
DRAINAGE PROFILES 2) The federal aid number is required on the first sheet of the plans, whether it is the index or vicinity map. .
DR
DRAINAGE DETAIL 3) Plan reference numbers shall not be repeated. 87 • 92
NTUT1 • NTUT6
STRUCTURE NOTES • UTILITIES 93 • 96 un, UT6 • UT8
UTILITY PLAN .
UT
UTILITY DETAIL

1) For any contract that consist of 30 or more plan sheets, an index is required. Also any contract with multiple volumes will have a complete index in each volume. - 4) The limit of plan sheets per volume is 225 pages. Break volumes at the end of a plan set.
PL.AN
REFERENCE
NO. .
NTIR
STRUCTURE NOTES • IRRIGATION
SHEET -
NOTE: ALL SHEET REFERENCES, FIRST NOS. OF STRUCTURE CODE DESIGNATIONS
AND MATCH LINE SHEET REFERENCES, ETC., THROUGHOUT THE PLANS,
REFER TO THE ENTRY IN THE PLAN REFERENCE NUMBER BOX.

OF
SHEETS
FILE NAME c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-1 .dgn
TIME 11 :44:36 AM 2/2/2022
DATE
HillCI
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.
REVISION

REGK>N
NO.
I
STATE ...... •
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
10 IWASI­
JOB NUMBER
CONTRACT NO.
DATE
BY

PLAN REF. NO•
EXAMPLE 4-1
Washington State
Department of Transportation
LOCATION NO.
P.E. STAMP BOX
IN1
SHEET
OF
INDEX

SHEETS 24 \CD~ y -r _,/ ---~
PLAN
REFERENCE
NO.
VM1
INDEX/VICINITY MAP 2-3
SQ1-SQ2
SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES 4
RS1
ROADWAY SECTIONS

30
T 17 N w w 5-6
PV1-PV2
PAVING AND PAVEMENT MARKING 7-8
RA1-RA2
ROAD APPROACH DETAILS 9
PL1
PLANING DETAILS 10
PD1
PAVING DETAILS

11-16
QT1-QT6
QUANTITY TABULATION-TRAFFIC 1
BEGIN NH-0000(000) 18
MD1
MONUMENT DETAILS 19
DL1
DETECTOR LOOP REPLACEMENT PLAN 24-25
S1-S2
SIGN

26
AV1
ADVANCED WARNING SIGN PLAN 27-39 13 \ / 28 \ \ 26
I l ~. 33 lJ
CD sa,Pni• SIN HWY.
I 27 280th ST. E 11 r--lJ f ) 3?5 > ~ ./ 288thAT. ELIJ 5 ~~ .:., ..,,,!~,. c: 32 ~ 18 _,[ 17
BEGIN PROJECT \ .->-01/
SR161 M.P. 8.95 ~ i--,.c.,.o%oth sr. EUJ
STA 472+60 ~~ 19 ~ 24 @
PLANS

25
TC1-TC13 ~:Ifil)~ i__.-:,:-N---+::-=---;-f<(....;_;:,;26:....:.4.::i:t~...i..;S:::..:T..:... . E::........i_ 288th ST. E ~W ® ~ -b«) ~ 2
I / KAPOWSIN HWY. ~ ~ ~I~ sou
YJ
J 4 10
PAVEMENT MARKING DETAILS
SIGN SPECIFICATIONS lJ
I 1, 23 lJJ 1
M /~ a:: a:: 304th ST. E
MD1

SS1-SS4 - 6 17 20-23 29
END NH-0000(000) --::~__J_...--END PROJECT -----a_:\ 31
S____;; R: . :.1. :. :6: . . 1___:_M.. :. .P. :. =-.=16=•...:..1....:.0----- 36 ~ \ g,
STA 850+08 r 18 N
TITLE i1t!~1 *~ 21
J 2~
SHEET
NO. 2Jr-J 19 \
TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN ~
A 1

- 16 \ 9 ~ 15 14 817!1;,M :.:t.# ~
TRouT0 /
LAKE ~ 20 !'7)"--.. 11 21 t -.1-----+-­ ,i­ / 161
Ar~ ~,! . . . ,_ _ '-_, , / - &i'/ ~ "-...... .s ~ 22 f.J.Jfp1 3P2nd AVE.E ~ 30 ~~ 28 <': ~ f: 0
C- ~ OAD 23 29 ,?D
V-::~~'i:~t f5 'v lJJ ~K ~Sy;~~/2 \~ ~ - ~
TWE~7rY
SEVEN - 26::j s; lj ~ \{. \
Notes to the Designer: 1) This is an example of combining the index and vicinity map on a small project. 0 4000 8000
SCALE IN FEET

2) For any contract that consists of 30 or more plan sheets, an index is required. 3) The Federal Aid Number is required on the first sheet of the plans, whether it is the index or vicinity map.
CDL
PL.AN 4) Plan reference nos. shall not be repeated.
REFERENCE
SHEET -
OF
SHEETS
FILE NAME c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-2.dgn
TIME 11 :44:37 AM 2/2/2022
DATE
HillCI
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
DESIGNER
ENTERED BY
CAD OPERATOR
CHECKED BY
TEAM LEADER
PROJ. ENGR.
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.
REVISION

REGK>N
NO.
I
JOB NUMBER \ -<'
NOTE:
ALL SHEET REFERENCES, FIRST NOS. OF STRUCTURE CODE DESIGNATIONS
AND MATCH LINE SHEET REFERENCES, ETC., THROUGHOUT THE PLANS,
REFER TO THE ENTRY IN THE PLAN REFERENCE NUMBER BOX.
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO

EXAMPLE 4-2
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 002000
CONTRACT NO.
BY ,,\
Plot2
STATE
10 IWASI­
DATE

% ~
NO.
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E.STAIIP.BOX
P.E. STAIIP. BOX
INDEX / VICINITY MAP
VM1
SHEET
OF

SHEETS PROJECT LICENSED PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATES
AS A LICENSED PROFESSIONAL IN DIRECT RESPONSIBLE CHARGE
OF DEVELOPING THIS CONTRACT, I CERTIFY THAT ALL PLANS
THAT CONTAIN MY STAMP HAVE BEEN DEVELOPED UNDER MY
SUPERVISION.
SUPERVISION .
REGISTERED
ARCHITECT ~TEOFW~=:! -
NOTES:
THIS PLAN SET WAS DEVELOPED ELECTRONICALLY UNDER THE DIRECT SUPERVISION
OF THE LICENSED PROFESSIONALS THAT HAVE AFFIXED THEIR SIGNATURE TO THIS PAGE.
THIS SHEET SERVES AS THE CERTIFICATION BY THE ABOVE LICENSED PROFESSIONALS
OF ALL SHEETS IN THIS PLAN SET WHERE THEIR STAMPS AND SIGNATURES APPEAR.

FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM. c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-2A.d n 11 :44: 39 AM
REGK>N

STATE
NO. 2/2/2022 10
HillCI
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-2A
WAS
JOB NUMBER
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION

DATE
BY
Washington State
Department of Transportation
LOCATION NO.
P.E. STAMP BOX
CT1
SHEET
OF
CERTIFICATION SHEET

SHEETS T. 13N. R. 2W. W.M.
PROJECT AREA
I <'.)1 (~~ ~..,V, 0-s, © +----~~ 3
I 4
I <-- ~ 'o ~ ~ ~ ...J co \_ 0::
STURDEVENT RD
I !
END MSB LINE
STA. MSB 521 +52.07
END LB LINE
STA. LB 138+15.53 i.O.T.

END NH-0000(000)
END PROJECT 1-5 M.P. 75.39 • STA. L 1520+00
I
DILLENBAUGH CREEK
BRIDGE 005/218
INCLUDED IN PROJECT
BEGIN H LINE
STA H 1728+70 P.O.T.
SOUTHWEST REGION
BEGIN LB LINE
STA LB 106+76.55 P.O.T.

Notes to the Designer: 10
MAURIN RD ff~i/t________ 1) This example uses a blow-up to show the construction limits. «o /
EGIN MBS LINE !jt / STA. MBS 499+27.96 P.O.T. 2) A sheet map can be very useful on more complex contract to identify the relation between plan sheet locations. ~i #' / 3) Primary control points are displayed in their coordinate location and labeled with the designation ID only.
BEGIN NH-0000 000
BEGIN PROJECT 1-5 M.P. 74.06
STA. L 1450+00 ~ l 1 15
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

Plot 1 c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-3.d n 11 :44:41 AM
REGK>N 2/2/2022
10 WAS
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEAD
PROJECT ENGINEER
STATE
NO.

JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-3
NH-0000(000) 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.

SP1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1
VICINITY MAP
VM1
SHEET
OF
SHEETS SECTION 6
SECTION

SR 225 13
SR 12
M.P. 388.61 TO M.P. 401 .92
M.P. 2.69 TO M.P. 11 .32 2
M.P. 100.45 TO M.P. 104.56
BEGIN PROJECT
SR 12 M.P. 165.98 9
SR 410 15
M.P. 416.89 TO M.P. 421 .84 14
M.P. 405.23 TO M.P. 413.41

SECTION 10
SR 260
M.P. 7.53 TO M.P. 13.87
M.P. 22.58 TO M.P. 24.73 ") } ===== =::;:::: /
WHITMAN /
SECTION -~
END PROJECT
SR 129 M.P. 36.22 1
SR 12
M.P. 165.98 TO M.P. 185.05

•
YAKIMA
Fort
Simcoe
SECTION 17
SR 129
M.P. 32.61 TO M.P. 36.22
I - - __.!. -1---...
SECTION 3
SECTION

SR 97
M.P. 35.46 TO M.P. 41 .27 12
SR 12
SECTION 11 4
SR 124
M.P. 22.73 TO M.P. 30.88
SR 221
M.P. 19.46 TO M.P. 23.22 16
SR 129
M.P. 0.00 TO M.P. 12.00

SECTION 5
SR 14
M.P. 152.24 TO M.P. 167.25
SECTION 8
SR 124
M.P. 1.10 TO M.P. 11 .19
Notes to the Designer: 1) This is an example of a region wide bst project, therefore only mile posts are shown (no stationing) due to the lack of project complexity. 2) This is an example of a state funded only project, therefore no fed. aid. proj. no. is shown. 0
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-4.d n 11 :44:43 AM 20
Plot4
REGK>N
STATE
NO. 2/2/2022
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
10 WAS
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.

10
SCALE IN MILES
EXAMPLE 4-4
JOB NUMBER
Washington State
Department of Transportation 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE
BY

LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
VM1
SHEET
OF
VICINITY MAP
SHEETS SECTION 15
BEGIN PROJECT
SR 12 M.P. 165.98
WHITMAN /

l __\
END PROJECT
SR 129 M.P. 36.22
SECTION •
YAKIMA
SECTION
Fort
Simcoe
I r1 \ __ __.!._1--~ 3
I

12 16
SECTION TABULATION 2
Notes to the Designer: 0 1) This is an alternative method of example 4-3, the same region wide bst project. section identification is in tabular format (see table). 10
SCALE IN MILES 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 20 2) This is an example of a state funded only project, therefore no Fed. Aid. Proj. No. is shown. 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-5.d n 11 :44:44 AM 2/2/2022
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
M.P. TO M.P. 12 410 97 221 14 225 12 2 260 260 124 12 12 12 12 129 129
Plot 5
REGK>N
STATE

NO. 10
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
WAS
EXAMPLE 4-5
JOB NUMBER
Washington State
Department of Transportation 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION

SR NO.
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
VM1
SHEET
OF
VICINITY MAP

SHEETS WIND RIVER BRIDGE NO. 14/122
NOT INCLUDED IN PROJECT
SR 14 M.P. 49.34 TO M.P. 49.46 !w wl
I
EQUATION
SR 14 M.P. 63.58 BACK = ........- -­ ~
SR 14 M.P. 63.60 AHEAD
BEGIN SECTION 2
SR 14 M.P. 52.89 w1~ ~· w ..... ...... ..... co 0:: 0:: 0::
END SECTION 1
SR 14 M.P. 50.84

0:: 13
LITTLE WHITE SALMON RIVER BRIDGE NO. 14/126
NOT INCLUDED IN PROJECT
SR 14 M.P. 56.87 TO M.P. 56.96
KLICKITAT RIVER BRIDGE NO. 14/212
INCLUDED IN PROJECT
SR 14 M.P. 75.76 TO M.P. 75.81
BEGIN NH-0000(000)
BEGIN PROJECT
BEGIN SECTION 1
SR 14 M.P. 45.80

GULCH BRIDGE NO. 14/131
SR 14 M.P. 59.03 TO M.P. 59.07
BN RR/Xin BRIDGE NO. 14/132
SR 14 M.P. 59.44 TO M.P. 59.46
Notes to the Designer: 1) This is an example of a simple paver utilizing mile posts only. If stationing is used in the plans, then stationing must be shown on the vicinity map.
PAVING EXCEPTION
SR 14 M.P. 63.45 TO M.P. 66.50
END NH-0000(000)
END PROJECT
END SECTION 2
SR 14 M.P. 76.93

BROUGHTON BRIDGE NO. 14/137
INCLUDED IN PROJECT
SR 14 M.P. 61.62 TO M.P. 61.65 2) This example shows how paving exceptions are shown on a vicinity map. 3) This example also shows how bridges are to be shown on a vicinity map when their location is within project the limits.
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

Plot6 c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-6.d n 11 :44:46 AM
REGK>N 2/2/2022
10 WAS
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
STATE
NO.

JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-6
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE

BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
VICINITY MAP
VM1
SHEET
OF
SHEETS DOT_RGG900
SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES
ITEM
NO

TOTAL
QUANTITY
SUB-TOTAL
SECTION
I-07.2(1)
OF
STANDARD
SPECS
I-07.2(2)
STD.
ITEM
NO.

UNIT * ** 6/16/2004
GROUP 1
GROUP 2
GROUP 3
GROUP 4
GROUP 5
SR77 49+00.00 TO 70+85.00
DB6 LINE 9+00.00
TO 29+85.00
MC-N LINE 10+00.00 TO 17+18.64

MC-S LINE 10+00.00
TO 13+59.65
W-NS LINE 10+00.00
TO 17+74.53
NS-W LINE 9+00.00
TO 18+19.15
BRIDGE
NO. 77/10
E-NS LINE 10+00.00
TO 18+83.05

NS-E LINE 9+00.00
TO 22+36.98
SR77 70+85.00
TO 95+00.00
DB6 LINE 7+65.00
TO 9+00.00
DB6 LINE 29+85.00
TO 31+20.00
THIRD
PARTY
DAMAGES

L.S.
PREPARATION 1
LUMP SUM 0001
MOBILIZATION 2 14.50 14.50 0025
ACRE
CLEARING AND GRUBBING 0.90 4.20 1.00 0.40 1.20 1.00 1.70 2.10 2.00 3 6.00 6.00 0049
EACH
REMOVING DRAINAGE STRUCTURE 1.00 5.00 4 25517.00 24817.00 0120
S.Y.
REMOVING ASPHALT CONC. PAVEMENT

5,679.00 3,057.00 5,219.00 2,238.00 221.00 221.00 8,182.00 700.00 5 930.00 930.00 0170
L.F.
REMOVING GUARDRAIL 170.00 180.00 1.00 1.00 7,160.00 11,500.00 15,810.00 6,560.00 60.00 700.00 580.00 6 4.00 4.00 0182
REMOVING GUARDRAIL ANCHOR 7
LUMP SUM 0215
L.S.
REMOVING MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC ITEM 8 350.00 350.00 0230
REMOVING WIRE FENCE 9 61810.00 61750.00 0310
C.Y.
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL

10 1250.00 1250.00 0330
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL - AREA POND A 11 1850.00 1850.00 0330
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL - AREA POND B 12 7000.00 7000.00 0330
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL - AREA POND C 13 109850.00 130.00 109720.00 0408
TON
SELECT BORROW INCL. HAUL 3,150.00 78,980.00 20,470.00 1,970.00 1,000.00 790.00 1,010.00 1,340.00 1,010.00 90.00 40.00 14 62080.00 70.00 62010.00 0470
EMBANKMENT COMPACTION 1,710.00 42,690.00 11,070.00 1,070.00 950.00 630.00 1,110.00 2,240.00 540.00 50.00 20.00 15 1513.00 1513.00 1030
DITCH EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL 784.00 511.00 6.00 212.00 16 3.00 3.00 1054
EACH
GRATE INLET TYPE 2

1.00 2.00 17 4100.00 4100.00 1086
QUARRY SPALLS 2.00 617.00 315.00 846.00 2,277.00 18 228.00 228.00 1161
L.F.
UNDERDRAIN PIPE 8 IN. DIAM. 19 660.00 660.00 1182
SCHEDULE A CULV. PIPE 18 IN. DIAM. 89.00 83.00 79.00 20 61.00 61.00 1272
CL. IV REINF. CONC. CULV. PIPE 18 IN. DIAM. 21 4.00 4.00 3090
CATCH BASIN TYPE 2 - 54 IN. DIAM. WITH FLOW RESTRITOR 22 1.00 1.00 3091
CATCH BASIN TYPE 1 23 505.00 505.00 3151
TESTING STORM SEWER PIPE 178.00 24 230.00 230.00 3541
SCHEDULE A STORM SEWER PIPE 12 IN. DIAM.

51.00 25 127.00 127.00 3582
SOLID WALL PVC STORM SEWER PIPE 24 IN. DIAM. 127.00 26 148.00 148.00 3602
L.F.
CORRUGATED POLYETHYLENE STORM SEWER PIPE 12 IN. DIAM. 27 600.00 600.00 4006
C.Y.
STRUCTURE EXCAVATION CLASS A INCL. HAUL 28
LUMP SUM 4013
L.S.
SHORING OR EXTRA EXCAVATION CL. A 29 141.00 141.00 4025
GRAVEL BACKFILL FOR WALL

141.00 2.00 150.00 200.00
GRADING 60.00 1,590.00 1,320.00 5,640.00 1,130.00 11,040.00 1,250.00 1,850.00 7,000.00
DRAINAGE 30.00 11.00 2.00 126.00 98.00 228.00 24.00 161.00 61.00
STORM SEWER 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 188.00 78.00 61.00 40.00 78.00 61.00 1.00 148.00
STRUCTURE 600.00 30 4.00 4.00 4060
EACH
FURNISHING AND DRIVING CONCRETE TEST PILE 31 1900.00 1900.00 4070
L.F.
FURNISHING CONC. PILING 24 INCH DIAM. 32 50.00 50.00 4080
DRIVING CONC. PILE 24 INCH DIAM.

33 54.00 54.00 8376
FURNISHING STEEL PILE TIP OR SHOE 34 119600.00 119600.00 4149
LB.
ST. REINF. BAR FOR BRIDGE 35 700.00 700.00 4322
C.Y.
CONC. CLASS 4000 FOR BRIDGE 700.00 36 1.00 1.00 4219
DOL
DEFICIENT STRENGTH CONC. PRICE ADJUSTMENT 1.00 37
LUMP SUM 4300
L.S.

SUPERSTRUCTURE BRIDGE 8/15 38 1688.00 1688.00 4352
L.F.
CONDUIT PIPE 2 IN. DIAM. 1,688.00 39 854.00 854.00 4415
TRAFFIC BARRIER 854.00
GROUP LEGEND :
GROUP NUMBER
SR
CONTROL SECTION
TAX SCHEDULE 1 2 3 4 5 77 77 77 77 77 140801 140800 1400CT 1400CY 140800 ** ** * * ** 4.00 1,900.00 50.00 54.00 119,600.00
L.S.

FUND PARTICIPANTS
STATE,FEDERAL AID
STATE
REGION 10
WA
JOB NUMBER 04H321/1
CONTRACT NO
DATE
REVISION
BY

000000
FEDERAL AID PROJECT. NO.
NH-0077(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation
EXAMPLE 4-7
SQ1
SHEET 3
OF
SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES

117
SHEETS DOT_RGG900
SUB-TOTAL
SECTION
I-07.2(2)
STANDARD
SPECS
STD.
ITEM
NO.

UNIT
QUANTITY
I-07.2(1)
OF 40 20634.00 375.00 20259.00 5100
TON
CRUSHED SURFACING BASE COURSE 41 10028.00 206.00 9822.00 5334
DOL
ANTI-STRIPPING ADDITIVE 42 180.00 180.00 5711
S.Y.
PLANING BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT

43 20045.00 410.00 19635.00 5767 44 21046.00 431.00 20615.00 5830 45 9962.00 204.00 9758.00 46 36.00 47 2.80 48 4279.00 49 252.00
ITEM
NO
TOTAL * 6/16/2004
GROUP 1
GROUP 2
GROUP 3
GROUP 4
GROUP 5
SR77 49+00.00 TO 70+85.00

DB6 LINE 9+00.00
TO 29+85.00
MC-N LINE 10+00.00 TO 17+18.64
MC-S LINE 10+00.00
TO 13+59.65
W-NS LINE 10+00.00
TO 17+74.53
NS-W LINE 9+00.00
TO 18+19.15
BRIDGE
NO. 77/10

E-NS LINE 10+00.00
TO 18+83.05
NS-E LINE 9+00.00
TO 22+36.98
SR77 70+85.00
TO 95+00.00
DB6 LINE 7+65.00
TO 9+00.00
DB6 LINE 29+85.00
TO 31+20.00

THIRD
PARTY
DAMAGES 2,676.00 4,515.00 1,910.00 900.00 1,680.00 1,570.00 1,780.00 2,600.00 2,628.00 375.00 1,333.00 2,313.00 923.00 425.00 760.00 690.00 765.00 1,020.00 1,593.00 178.00
HMA CL. 1/2 IN. PG 58-22 2,665.00 4,625.00 1,845.00 850.00 1,520.00 1,380.00 1,530.00 2,035.00 3,185.00 355.00 55.00
DOL
JOB MIX COMPLIANCE PRICE ADJUSTMENT 2,798.00 4,856.00 1,937.00 893.00 1,596.00 1,450.00 1,606.00 2,135.00 3,344.00 373.00 58.00 5835
COMPACTION PRICE ADJUSTMENT 1,325.00 2,299.00 917.00 422.00 755.00 686.00 760.00 1,011.00 1,583.00 176.00 28.00 36.00 6403
DAY
ESC LEAD 2.80 6414
ACRE

SEEDING, FERTILIZING, AND MULCHING 1.60 0.33 0.28 0.21 0.13 4248.00 6438
C.Y.
COMPOST 662.00 870.00 551.00 127.00 742.00 640.00 175.00 481.00 252.00 6468
S.Y.
STABILIZED CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCE **
SURFACING
LIQUID ASPHALT 28.00
ASPHALT CONCRETE PAVEMENT 180.00
EROSION CONTROL AND PLANTING 31.00 36.00 0.25 31.00 252.00 50 3790.00 3790.00 6373
L.F.

SILT FENCE 1,295.00 51 20000.00 20000.00 6490
DOL
EROSION/WATER POLLUTION CONTROL 20,000.00 52 3740.00 3740.00 6410
C.Y.
TOPSOIL TYPE B 53 1530.00 1530.00 6727
EXTRUDED CURB 54 522.00 522.00 6748
BEAM GUARDRAIL TYPE 1 - 8 FT. LONG POST 522.00 55 1894.00 1894.00 6751
BEAM GUARDRAIL TYPE 1 930.00 964.00 56 4.00 4.00 6760
EACH
BEAM GUARDRAIL TRANSITION SECTION TYPE D

57 4.00 4.00 6716
BEAM GUARDRAIL FLARED TERMINAL 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 1,480.00 625.00 390.00 1,400.00 2,340.00
TRAFFIC 1,130.00 58 4.00 4.00 6774
BEAM GUARDRAIL ANCHOR TYPE 4 59 1600.00 1600.00 6781
L.F.
TEMPORARY CONC. BARRIER 60 4.00 4.00 7440
TEMPORARY IMPACT ATTENUATOR 61 7400.00 7400.00 7444
DOL
REPAIR IMPACT ATTENUATOR 215.00 185.00 4.00 1,600.00 4.00 7,400.00 62 1.00 1.00 7447
EACH

TRUCK MOUNTED IMPACT ATTENUATOR 63 60.00 60.00 7449
HOUR
OPERATION OF TRUCK MOUNTED IMPACT ATTENUATOR 1.00 60.00 166.00 6832
FLEXIBLE GUIDE POST 44.00 14.00 23.00 14.00 17.00 18.00 14.00 22.00 23410.00 6806
L.F.
PAINT LINE 3,590.00 5,890.00 1,500.00 780.00 1,280.00 1,180.00 1,420.00 2,270.00 5,500.00 210.00 210.00 6807
PLASTIC LINE 210.00 67 3070.00 3070.00 6818
PLASTIC WIDE LINE 830.00 250.00 360.00 200.00 270.00 1,160.00 68 2580.00 2580.00 6854
PAINTED BARRIER LINE 1,340.00 620.00 160.00 150.00 150.00 160.00 69 100.00 100.00 6859
PLASTIC STOP LINE

30.00 70 6.00 6.00 6833
EACH
PLASTIC TRAFFIC ARROW 2.00 2.00 1.00 71 27.00 27.00 6881
PLASTIC DRAINAGE MARKING 6.00 9.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 72 54.00 54.00
PLASTIC JUNCTION BOX MARKING 10.00 2.00 5.00 4.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 7.00 73 4.00 4.00 6882
HUND
RAISED PAVEMENT MARKER TYPE 1 2.00 74 3.25 3.25 6884
RAISED PAVEMENT MARKER TYPE 2 1.43 0.28 0.18 0.08 0.28 0.31 0.28 0.41 2,400.00 4,550.00 2,400.00 64 166.00 65 24320.00 66 910.00 40.00 75 11000.00 11000.00 6888
L.F.
TEMPORARY PAVEMENT MARKING

76
LUMP SUM 6890
L.S.
PERMANENT SIGNING 77
LUMP SUM 6904
ILLUMINATION SYSTEM SCD 2641
GROUP LEGEND :
GROUP NUMBER
SR
CONTROL SECTION

TAX SCHEDULE 1 2 3 4 5 77 77 77 77 77 140801 140800 1400CT 1400CY 140800 ** ** * * ** 1.00 11.00 2.00 1,650.00
FUND PARTICIPANTS
REGION
STATE 10
WA 04H321/1
CONTRACT NO
REVISION 400.00
STATE,FEDERAL AID
STATE
JOB NUMBER

DATE 510.00
BY 000000
FEDERAL AID PROJECT. NO.
NH-0077(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation
EXAMPLE 4-8
SQ2
SHEET 4
OF

SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES 117
SHEETS DOT_RGG900
SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES
ITEM
NO
TOTAL
QUANTITY
SUB-TOTAL
SECTION
I-07.2(1)
OF
STANDARD
SPECS

I-07.2(2)
STD.
ITEM
NO.
UNIT * ** 6/16/2004
GROUP 1
GROUP 2
GROUP 3
GROUP 4
GROUP 5

SR77 49+00.00 TO 70+85.00
DB6 LINE 9+00.00
TO 29+85.00
MC-N LINE 10+00.00 TO 17+18.64
MC-S LINE 10+00.00
TO 13+59.65
W-NS LINE 10+00.00
TO 17+74.53
NS-W LINE 9+00.00
TO 18+19.15

BRIDGE
NO. 77/10
E-NS LINE 10+00.00
TO 18+83.05
NS-E LINE 9+00.00
TO 22+36.98
SR77 70+85.00
TO 95+00.00
DB6 LINE 7+65.00
TO 9+00.00

DB6 LINE 29+85.00
TO 31+20.00
THIRD
PARTY
DAMAGES
L.S. 78
LUMP SUM 6904
L.S.
ILLUMINATION SYSTEM SCD 2642 79
LUMP SUM

6904
ILLUMINATION SYSTEM SCX 2643 80 9380 81 2.00 2.00
TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
EACH
TEMPORARY PAINTED TRAFFIC ARROW 2.00 82 900.00 900.00 6979
HOUR
TRAFFIC CONTROL LABOR 900.00 83 1000.00 1000.00 6972
TRAFFIC CONTROL SUPERVISOR 1,000.00 84 1085.00 1085.00 6982
S.F.
CONSTRUCTION SIGNS CLASS A

1,085.00 85 1740.00 1740.00 7006
C.Y.
STRUCTURE EXCAVATION CLASS B INCL. HAUL 580.00 390.00 320.00 110.00 40.00 150.00 80.00 70.00 86 6550.00 6550.00 7008
SHORING OR EXTRA EXCAVATION CLASS B 750.00 1,140.00 1,670.00 670.00 270.00 1,040.00 530.00 480.00 120.00 290.00 90.00 20.00 40.00 40.00 40.00 60.00 1.00 1.00
L.S.
OTHER ITEMS 87 12.00 12.00 7014
GRAVEL BACKFILL FOR DRAIN 88 700.00 700.00 7018 mGAL
WATER 89 1.00 1.00 7029
EACH
PLUGGING EXISTING PIPE

90
LUMP SUM 7037
STRUCTURE SURVEYING 91 5.00 5.00 7045
MONUMENT CASE AND COVER 92 593.00 593.00 7065
S.Y.
CONC. SLOPE PROTECTION 12.00 1.00
L.S. 2.00 593.00 93 320.00 320.00 7110
L.F.
WIRE FENCE TYPE 1 94
LUMP SUM

7350
L.S.
CLEANING EXISTING DRAINAGE STRUCTURE 95 1200.00 1200.00 7400
HOUR
TRAINING 1,200.00 96 2000.00 2000.00 7480
DOL
ROADSIDE CLEANUP 2,000.00 97 7490
TRIMMING AND CLEANUP 98 5.00 5.00 7725
REIMBURSEMENT FOR THIRD PARTY DAMAGE 99 -1.00 -1.00 7728
MINOR CHANGE

-1.00 100
LUMP SUM 7736
L.S.
SPCC PLAN 101
LUMP SUM 7500
FIELD OFFICE BUILDING 102 120.00 120.00 7550
S.Y.
CONSTRUCTION GEOTEXTILE FOR UNDERGROUND DRAINAGE 80.00 103 4220.00 4220.00 7552
CONSTRUCTION GEOTEXTILE FOR SOIL STABILIZATION 104 1.00 1.00 7562
EACH

MAILBOX SUPPORT TYPE 1
GROUP LEGEND : 320.00
GROUP NUMBER
SR
CONTROL SECTION
TAX SCHEDULE 1 2 3 4 5 77 77 77 77 77 140801 140800 1400CT 1400CY 140800 ** ** * * **
L.S. 20.00
L.S. 20.00 650.00 330.00 880.00 2,360.00 1.00
FUND PARTICIPANTS
STATE,FEDERAL AID
STATE

REGION 10
WA 04H321/1
CONTRACT NO
REVISION
L.S. 5.00
JOB NUMBER
DATE 1.00
BY 000000
FEDERAL AID PROJECT. NO.
NH-0077(000)

Washington State
Department of Transportation
EXAMPLE 4-9
SQ3
SHEET 5
OF
SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES 117
SHEETS NW
T.15N. R.35E. W.M.
NE
SEC.23 1/4

u.i u.i 0:: 0:: tn <D ,..., ,..., 0:: 0:: ..,.,..., ,...,tn 1/4 s u.i ii~ <D ~[fl
EASEMENT HAUL ROAD ~~ 30 29 28 27 26 25 30 29 28 27 31 32 33 34 35 36 31 32 33 34 6 5 4 3 2
I !l 6 ~ ~1) ,Y 3 7 8 18 17 16 15 19 20 21 22
TO OTHELLO <
32 MILES­ 31
T. 15 N. ii) 7
13 I/ 18 ~
SR 26 29 30 .r_ 32 11 28 27/ 33 f 26 8 30 25 35
I 36
I '8

21 20
V, ASH UCN 25 {35 36
V 2 1 11 12 ~ 'lr ~ 16 ~ 1 ;1 ~~ l 34
Notes to the Designer: 13 k 1) Make sure that all notes are project specific. 24 ~ s~ . 'J 27 s~ ~ ~3 31 26 25 2) The contract reclamation plan is developed from the ultimate reclamation plan on file with the regional materials laboratory. r-jf: ~ !'-..,Jo ~"o ~"'t:o
QUARRY SITE
QS-AD-112
SW 1/4 NE 1/4
SEC.23 12""
I -;;:: ~ J 1f
T. 14 N.

1 1. Quarry QS-AD-112 is owned by the Washington State Department of Transportation. 2. All slope intersections shal I be rounded for natural appearance. 3. No contaminates are anticipated. 4. When all mining is completed in this quarry site , all disturbed areas shall be seeded, fertilized, and mulched with special erosion control mix. 5. Drainage shall be towards the south end of the site. 6. Scalpings shall be used on the quarry floor and on the sides to obtain the side slope. It may be necessary to haul additional borrow material into site to construct the side slopes for ultimate reclamation. 7. All pit boundaries shall be fenced with Type 2 wire fencing including a 20 foot wide gate at the haul road as first order of work. ,..., 0::
I
T. 16 N.
T. 15 N.
NOTES: ~ c5 z
VICINITY MAP ::::, 0 r\ ... /
Q) ( '- -- / ...., ( / / 2
SCALE IN MILES
C!l 4 l­ a: --H-- A
QUARRY SITE QS-AD-112
There is sufficient material in this quarrv for this proiect

/
I \_1 0
I 6
I 1500
SOURCE OF MATERIAL FOR PRODUCTION OF:
BENCH MARK
TOP OF 1" IRON ROD
ASSUMED ELEV. 1500 1500 1495
BALLAST
CRUSHED SURFACING TOP COURSE
CRUSHED SCREENING 'h INCH TO V. INCH
CRUSHED SCREENING V. INCH TO 0
PRIME COAT AGGREGATE
MINERAL AGGREGATE FOR ASPHALT CONCRETE
PAVEMENT CLASS B

1495
I 1490 / ~/ 1485
STRIPPING INCLUDING HAUL SITE QS-AD-112 / ''­
I '­ '­ 1490
I -... -----/
I 1485 1480 1480 1475 1475 1470 1470 1465 1465 1460 1460 >­ 0:: <{
LEGEND ~ l
ALLOWABLE WORK AREA 0
NW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC.23

z ::::, 0 0 ::::, 0 100 200 400 300 l­
Contract Work Area 1485 1480
Contour Interval 5' ,-\
I
A 1475 ( - , /
I I
I / r \ / \ , 1 1-~ 1 \ c'\. I , \._____ ~
ULTIMATE
SLOPE 1490 1485 ,-­ 1480 /
RECLAIMED
CONTRACT
SLOPE

1470
I
C
B r-
WO-, a: 1490
I~: a:
SECTION A-A
C!l
Existing Contours
Ultimate Contours
Area For Additional
Borrow Material

I­ c5 z ,- .... __ _ 0
I 1475 1470
B
I 1465
SLOPE TO BE MINED
VERTICALLY
REJECT SCALPINGS & OTHER MATERIALS
C / 1465
C /
C

1460 0 200
QUARRY SITE QS-AD-112 400 1460 800 1000 1200
SECTION B-B
PIT FLOOR DETAIL 100 200
SCALE IN FEET c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-10.d n 11 :44:47 AM 600 0
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

Plot 10
REGK>N 2/2/2022 10
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
STATE
NO.
WAS

JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-10
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE

BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
RC1
SHEET
OF
RECLAMATION PLAN
SHEETS q_ 000 3' 000
VARIES

3'
PROFILE GRADE &
PIVOT POINT i/ --­
MATCH EXISTING --­
I___________ ' ----­
MATCH EXISTING --­ ~ - - - ­ EOsU"9 --T­ i 5",faci"9 _________________________ I' 1
Q1~ 3
I
CONSTRUCTION NOTES
ROADWAY SECTION A

0
STA. L 461+50 TO STA. L 465+36
STA. L 468+18 TO STA. L 471+61 00 00 00
VARIES
SAWCUT ---­
0.02 FT./FT. t,1 .s ~ - 1 " • ---------:-----; - I I 2 i/ --­
MATCH EXISTING ------------------~----~-~~~"'.~~-~"'.":~____________ J ---- ------\----~~ '," !., I ~
MAT~STING 1
LEGEND
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-11.d!ln 11 :44:49 AM 2/2/2022
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGK>N
NO.
I © 0 0 © ©
10 IWASI­

CONTRACT NO.
BY
CRUSHED SURFACING BASE COURSE
PLANING BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL
EMBANKMENT COMPACTION
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-11
NH-0000(000)

Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 002000
DATE
ASPHALT CONCRETE PAVEMENT CLASS A PG. 64-28
Plot 11
STATE
JOB NUMBER
REVISION --­
Some overlay projects do not need a profile alignment.
Where a profile alignment is not needed, omit "PROFILE
GRADE".
The Profile Grade and Pivot Point are usually coincidental and at the centerline, but may sometimes be based on an offset roadway feature, like an offset crown.

0.90'
STA. L 471+61 TO STA. L 473+00
ENTERED BY
ALL PAVEMENT AND SURFACING DEPTHS
SHOWN ARE COMPACTED DEPTHS (SEE
STD. SPEC. 5-04.3(7) FOR MAXIMUM
DEPTHS PER LAYER) 3
ROADWAY SECTION B
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY

BRIDGE NO. 241/010 AND APPROACH
SLABS NOT INCLUDED IN PROJECT STA.
L465+36 TO STA. L468+18
Notes to the Designer: 3'
PROFILE GRADE &
PIVOT POINT /
SEE PAVING PLANS
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
DATE

P.E. STAMP BOX
ROADWAY SECTION
RS2
SHEET
OF
SHEETS VARIES
VARIES 2'-10' 12'-15' 0-15' 0'-10' 3'MIN.
VARIES 3'MIN . 3'MIN . 12' 0-10'
VARIES 12'-16' 8'-10' 3' MIN.
PROFILE GRADE &
PIVOT POINT

MATCH EXISTING --------­ _ EXISTING_ROAQWAY _______ _
ROADWAY SECTION B
ROADWAY SECTION A
STATION
L 10+00
L 34+75
C 318+93
TO
L 46+96
L 77+58
L 241+79
CEW 13+00

L 31+11
C 327+23
STATION
L 64+38
L 239+15
L 242+85
CEW 30+07
OR RIGHT EDGE
OF PAVED LANE 3'MIN . 8' 12' 12' 8' 3'MIN .
VARIES

PROFILE GRADE &
PIVOT POINT 3'MIN . 0-10' 13'-15' 0-10' 3' MIN.
PIVOT POINT
MATCH EXISTING _ .EXJS.TlN!UIDhD.111/AY_______ J
ROADWAY SECTION C
STATION
L 64+38
L 239+15
TO
ROADWAY SECTION D
Notes to the Designer:

L 77+58
L 241+79
Some overlay projects do not need a profile alignment.
Where a profile alignment is not needed, omit "PROFILE
GRADE".
The Profile Grade and Pivot Point are usually coincidental and at the centerline, but may sometimes be based on an offset roadway feature, like an offset crown.
LEGEND 0 0 0
PLANING BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT
HMA CL. 'I, IN. PG
SHOULDER FINISHING

STATION
C 327+23
TO
C 333+02
L 39+28
NOTES: 1. ALL DEPTHS SHOWN ARE COMPACTED DEPTHS 2. SEE PAVING PLAN FOR VARIABLE WIDTHS 3. BRIDGE 12/612 IS INCLUDED IN THIS PROJECT (STATION L 31+11 TO L34+75)
NOT TO SCALE
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

Plot 12 c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-12.d n 11 :44:50 AM 2/2/2022
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGK>N
STATE
NO. 10
WAS

JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-12
NH-0000(000) 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.

XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1
ROADWAY SECTION
RS3
SHEET
OF
SHEETS CONSTRUCTION NOTES: 0
AUXILIARY PASSING LANE
LANE VARIES FROM O' AT L 669+29
TO 12' AT L 672+24, AND
FROM 12' AT L702+10 TO O'AT
L 708+01

0
L-LINE
RIGHT SHOULDER
SHOULDER VARIES FROM 8' AT L 699+29
TO 4' AT L 670+28, AND FROM 4'
AT L 706+04 TO 8' AT 8' 3' - 12'
Match
Existing Slope ~ --­ 8'L 708+01 12'
VARIES
Ex~lope

2 -­ ­ -----
LEGEND ~ © 0 4'L 706+04
ASPHALT CONG. PAVEMENT CL. B -0.15'COMP. DEPTH
CRUSHED SURFACING TOP COURSE - VARIES COMP. DEPTH
ROADWAY SECTION C
L 505+25 TO L 997+38 - 4'L 702+10
L-LINE
Notes to the Designer: 8' 3' 12' 12'
A
B

1) The auxiliary passing lane detail is shown here for your use in seeing what Roadway Section C is accomplishing without the use of a paving or channelization plan on a simple paving project. >­ 4' L 672+24 2) The two Roadway Sections represent different ways of showing the same varying roadway configuration. 4' L 670+28 >- 8' L 669+24 ~ -­ -­ 3) Even though the shoulder doesn't specify tapering exactly as shown in the plan detail it is sufficient for an overlay project where the paving in the field will be done to the existing condition and the contractor can still obtain a reasonable quantity take-off from it.
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM. __ Existing +--;------­ 11 :44:52 AM 2/2/2022
HillCI
REGK>N
NO.
I
JOB NUMBER

CONTRACT NO.
BY 1
ROADWAY SECTION C
A 0 0-12' 12' 12'-0 0
B 8' 8'-4' 4' 4'-8' 8'
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-1 3
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1

002000
DATE 0.15'
Plot 13
STATE
10 IWASI­
REVISION 2
Surfacing_ ____r
STATION
L 505+25 TO L 669+29
L 669+29 TO L 672+24
L 672+24 TO L 702+10
L 702+10 TO L 708+01
L 708+01 TO L 997+38

c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-13.d!ln
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM. ,
Match
Existing Slope
I
AUXILIARY PASSING LANE

FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
ROADWAY SECTION
RS4
SHEET

OF
SHEETS PROFILE GRADE & 1-5
PIVOT POINT 12'
LANE 12'
LANE
A
GORE s· ~ 4 >---o~.s~o~· 4 ~ 1 · ·I: 1 • 3'± , I
I .I 0.50' 1.55' 4 }---~
CONSTRUCTION NOTES: 0 0 0
DO NOT MAKE VERTICAL CUT
BELOW PCCP PANEL USE 1:1 4" CORRUGATED PLASTIC UNDERDRAIN
PIPE TO BE REMOVED AS PART. OF
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL.

ROADWAY SECTION B-1
STATION RANGE
L 1450+25 (RT.) TO L 1464+01 (RT.)
L 1461+01 (RT.) TO L 1464+41 (RT.)
L 1464+41 (RT.) TO L 1467+01 (RT.)
L 1467+01 (RT.) TO L 1470+20 (RT.)
SEE STAGING AND TESC PLANS FOR
BARRIER TYPE AND PLACEMENT ~
L 1504+76 (RT.) TO L 1510+75 (RT.)
L 1510+75 (RT.) TO L 1517+26 (RT.)
L 1517+26 (RT.) TO L 1518+26 (RT.)

SEE SHOULDER DETAILS,
REFERENCE SHEET R16
L 1518+26 (RT.) TO L 1520+00 (RT.) ~ ~
SAW CUT OR GRIND EDGE TO BE
WITHIN 1" OF EDGE OF
EXISTING CONC. PANEL EDGE ~
SEE SHOULDER SCHEDULE,
REFERENCE SHEET RS15, RS16
FOR SHOULDER SLOPE s > - VARIES ----~
A

B o· o·
O'
O'- 2' o· ­ 16' 12'- O' -­
C 10' 10'- 8' 8' 8' 2' - 15' 15' 15' 15'- 2' 2'- O' 8' 8' 8'- 10' 10' o·
AL LINE
BL LINE 11
SAW CUT OR GRIND EDGE
ROADWAY SECTION B-2
STATION RANGE
L 1470+20 (RT.) TO L 1473+01 (RT.)

A 16' - 11'
L 1495+17 (RT.) TO L 1504+76 (RT.) 11' - 12' 2
COMPACTED DEPTH OF ANY LIFT SHALL
BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 5.04
OF THE WSDOT STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
ALL DEPTHS ARE COMPACTED DEPTHS
NST = NOT STEEPER THAN
LEGEND
HMA CL. 'h IN. PG 70-22
HMA CL. 'h IN. PG 64-22
HMA FOR PRELEVELING CL.'h IN. PG 64-22
CRUSHED SURFACING BASE COURSE
SPECIAL BORROW INCL. HAUL
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL
PLANING BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT

TOPSOIL TYPE B
NOT TO SCALE
FILE NAME c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-14.d n
TIME 11 :44:54 AM 2/2/2022
DATE
HillCI
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
DESIGNER
ENTERED BY
CAD OPERA TOR
CHECKED BY
TEAM LEAD
PROJ. ENGR.
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.
REVISION

Plot 3
REGK>N
STATE
NO. 10
WAS
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-14
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation

002000
CONTRACT NO.
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.
SP1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
RS3
SHEET
OF

ROADWAY SECTION
SHEETS B
A
C
LANES
SHOULDER
D
M 2'MIN
PROFILE GRADE &
PIVOT POINT ~~

--------­ ------­
VARIES 6 --~
EXISTING GROUND
I
O.S'MIN.
ROADWAY SECTION 1-1
STATION RANGE
A
B
H 1728+70 TO H 1728+92

8.4' 11.3'
H 1728+92 TO H 1729+09 8.4' 11.3'
NOTES:
H 1729+09 TO H 1729+40 8.3'-10.3' 11.3' 0 0
H 1729+40 (RT.) TO H 1730+53 (RT.)
H 1729+40 (LT.) TO H 1730+76 (LT.)
CROSS SLOPES VARY,
SEE SUPERELEVATION DIAGRAMS
C 10.7' 10.7'- 12.9' 12.9'-17' 17' - 32.2' 10.3'-10.6'
D 9.4' 9.4'- 10.3' 10.3' 10.3'

11.3'-17.8'
CEMENT CONCRETE TRAFFIC CURB
SEE STANDARD PLAN F-10.12
AND GUTTER 3' 6' 1.5'
SIDEWALK
ROUNDABOUT TRUCK APRON
CEMENT CONCRETE CURB
I
B'C
LANE

ISLAND
D
PROFILE GRADE &
PIVOT POINT 0
SEE SHOULDER SCHEDULE,
REFERENCE SHEET RS15, RS16
FOR SHOULDER SLOPE
A
F
LANE

E
ISLAND 0 1.5' 6' 3'
SIDEWALK ~·
ROUND EDGE FOR
SMOOTH TRANSITION
SEE STANDARD PLAN F-30.10
COMPACTED DEPTH OF ANY LIFT SHALL
BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 5.04
OF THE WSDOT STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
ALL DEPTHS ARE COMPACTED DEPTHS
NST = NOT STEEPER THAN

LEGEND
HMA CL. 'A IN. PG 70-22
ROADWAY SECTION 1-2
HMA CL. 'A IN. PG 64-22
A
STATION RANGE
HMA FOR PRELEVELING CL.'A IN. PG 64-22
H 1730+53 (RT.) TO H 1730+81 (RT.)
CRUSHED SURFACING BASE COURSE
H 1730+81 (RT.) TO H 1730+92 (RT.)

SPECIAL BORROW INCL. HAUL
H 1730+76 (LT.) TO H 1730+81 (LT.)
B
C 1.3' 1.3' - 1.5' 1.5'-11.9'
H 1730+92 (RT.) TO H 1731+62 (RT.)
H 1730+81 (LT.) TO H 1731+60 (LT.)
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL 21' • 21.2' 19.2' - 20. 3'
D
E
F

20.5' 20. 5' - 22.2'
O' 19.7' 19.7'- 21 .2' 20.1'- 22' 5' - 23.6' 19'
O' 2' ­ 11 .5'
PLANING BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT
TOPSOIL TYPE B
NOT TO SCALE
FILE NAME c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-15.d n
TIME
DATE 11 :44:55 AM
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

Plot 13
REGK>N 2/2/2022
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEAD
PROJECT ENGINEER
STATE
NO. 10
WAS

JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-15
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE

BY
LOCATION NO.
SP1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
RS13
SHEET
OF
ROADWAY SECTION
SHEETS LANE
EDGE

410
EXISTING s'ti~~f -i :
ROCKCUT
LANE --.~~T<7~\
EXISTING ~I • 1 \ ----/,_,. ..... \ \ ,,,.
I'\\ l~~if~-NG /l!_ R~~; 'o~TCROPPING i ~ --~':..._ ~R 4'0R 10' ----- "°) ~ _l_ . . __ . . . ,' ,,'-,..~
If// ' I _;_!
I ' 3 , _ /. :_ / /,/,-....:'' / --------
ROCK OUTCROPPING
EXIST. SLOPE ; -- ; 6:1 OR FLATIER

C ' <
REMOVE EXISTING
CONCRETE BARRI ER °"';'-' ·>· ·S.·1 -1~~~~:TING
SLOPE
DITCH DEPTH VARIES
MATCH EXISTING DEPTH
SLOPE IS LEVEL
MEDIAN BERM DETAIL (TYPICAL)
ROCKCUT DETAIL (TYPICAL)
LL 1118+92 to 1126+00 MED.
LL 1177+50 to 1192+50 MED.

LL 1225+45 to 1228+50 MED.
LL 1240+00 to 1250+20 MED.
LR 1112+50 to 1115+00 MED.
LR 1128+10 to 1146+70 MED.
LR 1152+70 to 1155+50 MED.
LL 1119+75 to 1140+50 LT.
LL 1176+50 to 1193+00 LT.
LL 1203.50 to 1205+00 LT.
LR 1092+50 to 1105+50 MED.
LR 1220+00 to 1254+00 MED.
LR 1275+50 to 1281+00 MED.

LL 1220+00 to 1222+50 LT.
LL 1376+00 to 1 382+50 LT.
LR 1134+50 to 1138+50 RT.
LR 1178+00 to 1179+25 RT.
LR 1182+00 to 1194+40 RT.
LANE
EDGE ____l
UJ z
SHOULDER! u. 4' (TYP.) '.5 0 .. .. 1-90
L ~NE

I
SLOPE SELECTION TABLE
MEDIAN
I SHOULDER 4'
UJ ('.) (TYP.)
Cl
UJ -------------, ' ,,---- <~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ ~-6·1 -1-- // ',
UJ z
HEIGHT
OF CUT

SLOPE NOT
STEEPER THAN u. 0-5 5-20
OVER 20 6:1 3:1 2:1 '.5 0 ',
UJ ('.)
UJ ~...__ _ _D_IT_C~H.:.......::D~E~P~T~H_V~A~R~IE~S=---J~
SLOPE FLATTENING DETAIL (TYPICAL) ---\~C-2---------------LEGEND '--0
MATCH EXISTING
MEDIAN CUT DETAIL (TYPICAL) 0 0
G
ROADWAY EXCAVATION INCL. HAUL
EMBANKMENT COMPACTION
CRUSHED SURFACING BASE COURSE

LR 1274+50 to 1276+00
LR 1332+50 to 1341+00
LR 1199+50 to 1203+75 MED.
LR 1588+10 to 1598+00 MED.
LR 1691+50 to 1710+00 MED.
LL 1094+50 to 1097+00 MED.
LL 1177+50 to 1192+50 MED.
LL 1344+25 to 1353+50 MED.
LR 1134+00 to 11 38+00 RT.
LR 1333+50 to 1338+00 RT.
LR 1372+50 to 1376+00 RT.

LL 1135+50 to 1140+50 LT.
LL 1214+50 to 1220+00 LT.
LL 1241+00 to 1254+50 LT.
NOT TO SCALE
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-16.dan 11 :44:57 AM
REGK>N
NO. 2/2/2022
Plot 16
STATE
10 IWASI­
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.

I
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-16
NH-0000(000) 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE
BY

LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
Washington State
Department of Transportation t - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1
ROADWAY SECTION
RS6
SHEET
OF
SHEETS

----------------------,,-----­ // ---------------­ -----------­ ~ 1~~ ~~hx~=~!~~)7 ~ .'(1/j ' ~ ~ \~ ( .
WASTE MATE­ ' \ i > '\ ~ ~ -(-APPR_ox. _1s,oo_o cY_J _........,~ ::_::::::!_::--------__ J_1f_Q_-;,------------------________ lR__ LJNE_ __________ -t------------------------t ---------------------___ J_1r~---~\ --------- --------- ------------------: ::::::1:::-:·.::::::: ::: \~ ..
B : \~1 '----------------------------T-----------------------------------------------------~«'''''(''«««««««««««<««<««<\,,,,,,,,,u/{/////{hf/hf/hf////////////4////////////////,l,l,l,l,l,l,l,l///////////////////,l///////////lj~ 1\
I ~U(((((((({(((((((({({{{({((((((((((((((((((
MAINTAIN EXISTING DRAINAGE
LL
CHANNELS (TYP.)
LINE
I 1:3 (TYP.) ----T--­ -­ ' ' ~
I

--~---~~-~-, ----­
WASTE MATERIAL (METHOD A COMPACTION)
SECTION
NOTE:
SEE SPECIAL PROVISIONS
BITUMINOUS MATERIAL SHALL NOT
BE DEPOSITED AT THIS SITE.
NOT TO SCALE
WASTE MATERIAL (METHOD A COMPACTION) ff})))),,,,, ~ }})})}))}}})}}}}}})}}}})}))}}~~)}}))))))))) ,,'
REMOVE EXISTING
GUARDRAIL

,,,))))})))})))})}))» ',
LtcUNE ,]Q )t"~'- {
I 1 ,j , =. 193; ----.: 1920 : ' ',
LR
LINE ',
WASTE MATERIAL ______E:IST. CULVERT\ ---------~~~~~:, (APPROX. 15,000 CY) -- - - -- - - - -- - - - -- - - - -- - - - - -- - - - - -- - - --.1 '
PLAIN ST. CULV. PIPE ________LR.-LINE. ---- --------/i-------1310 __ -------------------------------------­ / / -7~-,,,c----L.<-' -------~----­
0.109 IN. TH. 60 IN. DIA. (SEE SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ~,;,,,,,'.,,;,,,,,,'.,,~~"~''''.""'~~~~<<~'.,~~~:· -- L-----~ /(- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - ­
SECTION C-C
SEE SPECIAL PROVISIONS

C ----- ~ EXIST. CULVERT
NOTE:
BITUMINOUS MATERIAL SHALL NOT
BE DEPOSITED AT THIS SITE.
NOT TO SCALE c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-17.d n 11 :44:58 AM 2/2/2022
DATE
HillCI
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
DESIGNER
ENTERED BY
CAD OPERA TOR
CHECKED BY
TEAM LEADER
PROJ. ENGR.
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.
REVISION
FILE NAME

Plot 17
REGK>N
TIME
STATE
NO. 10
WAS
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-17

NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 002000
CONTRACT NO.
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
CG1
SHEET
OF

CONTOUR GRADING
SHEETS T. 30 N., R. 2 E. W.M.
Notes to the Designer: 1) The need for this plan is to show right of way boundaries and provide data for surveying in right of way. '°I~ 2) This example shows right of way as a separate plan. This was done because combining right of way with other plan information such as alignment would have made it too busy for one plan. If your project's right of way can be shown with alignment information without creating plan confusion then do so. Refer to Division 400.06(9) of the
Plans Preparation Manual for information on what a right of way plan should show. :Ji,., ""SECTION CORNER FOUND
IRON PIPE 3) In this example the right of way alignment is the same as the construction alignment.
When the right of way alignment is coincidental with the construction centerline, an equation is provided at the begin of project to tie right of way and construction stationing together. Construction stationing is then used to show offset distances to right of way and other contract information. Refer to Division 400.06(9) of the Plans Preparation Manual.
C 1411+29.65 50'LT.
C 1420+01 .55 208.58' LT.
RELINQUISHMENT
TO COUNTY

GOV'T. LOT 1
SEC. 32
C 1419+93.42 151 .33'LT.
R. = 500'
L. = 31 .715'
C 1419+89.98 120.02' LT.
C 1419+88.82 100.04' LT.
GOV'T. LOT 6
SEC. 5
C 1410+90.48 50' LT.

C 1418+04.485 50'RT.
C 1412+32.05 55' RT.
C 1418+64.485 50'RT.
TURNBACK LINE
C 1412+56.28 105' RT.
BEGIN NH-0000 000
BEGIN PROJECT
STA. C 1410+82.58 P.O.T.
R/W 344+48.82 P.O.T.
C 1412+45.81 208.42'RT.

u.j u.j
C 1418+04.485 130'RT.
COUNTY ;; ~~ ~~
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION
EASEMENT
C 1418+64.485 130' RT. :Ro
U">O "' ti"' ti zz c:, "'"­ ,w-, ,w-,
II - ci ..J"·
NE 1/4 NW
SEC. 5

,-: ,-: 1/4
SE 1/4
SW 1/4
SEC. 32
C 1413+04.49 220.95'RT. z ' , CORNER FO ND
IRON PIPE 50 0 100
SCALE IN FEET
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-18.d n 11 :44:59 AM
Plot 18
REGK>N 2/2/2022
10 WAS
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEADER
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.

STATE
NO.
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-18
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 002000
CONTRACT NO.

REVISION
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
RIGHT OF WAY
RW1
SHEET
OF

SHEETS CURVE DATA
P.I. STATION
FR 1307+46.13
AL 1480+11.70
AR 1477+31 .23
BR 1488+40.59
NORT.HING 809209.67 808718.52 808613.05 809485.54
EASTING 1357202.23 1357592.87 1357915.39 1357229.98
DELT.A 74'16'30" LT. 2'00'42" LT. 2'51'24" LT. 2'15'21" RT.
RADIUS 300.00' 3000.00' 300000' 3000.00'

TANGENT 227.20' 52.68' 74.80' 59.06'
T. 13N. R. 2W. W.M.
SUPER
LENGTH 388.90' 105.34' 149.57' 118.11' 4% LT. 4% RT. -3% RT.
MATCH LINE SEE SHEET AL6
PRIMARY CONTROL TABLE
HORIZONTAL DATUM
NAD (83/91) WA SOUTH US FEET
LB LINE 118+00
PROJECT DATUM
VERTICAL DATUM
COMBINED FACTOR 0.999968460
NAVD 88

DESIGNATION
NORTHING
EASTING
GP21005-28 477870.120 1031576.369 805997.914 1359755.678
GP21005-74 478119.690 1031525.604 806247.507 1359704.909
GP21005-29 480910.387 1029161.180 809038.463 1357340.265
GP21005-75 480969.468 1029135.314 809097.550 1357314.396
TRANSFORM SPC TO PDC (SPC us Feet* (1/CF)) + ((39.37/12) • 100000)=PDC
TRANSFORM PDC TO SPC (PDC us Feet - ((39.37/12) • 100000)) • CF=SPC ~ /ii /5 1487+81.92 , (278.52'LT.) ~
LB 118+49.06 ~~ (135.69'RT.) '

ELEVATION 222.523 220.741 230.646 232.788 r . 1
NE 1.4 SE 1.4 r
SEC.9 1 (202. 66' LT.)
AL 1480+64.37 P.T.
AL 1480+11.70 P.I.
BL 1484+17.62 P.O.B. = 1480 /-5
LA 1242+83.26 = /5 1489+02.96 :I: ~~ ~ :::;; /
EB.__J_)g7+46.13 P.I. [ 1 / / ,
FR 1309+46.97 A.P. ''----...._, /'-." 1490 1310 1
N 37'48'19" W

" / " ~ " / <(
I- w w ""
N37'48'19.1"W :I: "' 1490 en
UJ / ""
SE 1.4 NE 1.4
SEC. 9
LB 122+26.54
BR 1488+40.59 P.I. " '" 1490 " / + ~ w
UJ z ::J _, z ' 0 0 ;;;
UJ

en //
AR 1484+17.62 P.O.E. = 1: :
FR 1309+07.84 P.T. ""/ ""­ 1485 f Ii=
AR 1483+82.47 A.P. <( ', / "'\ N 37'48'19" BL
LINE/ /--­___, '-.
W ~;.. I~3:~ ~LB 121+28.09 =
L 1484+17.62 (.)
I­ \ ~ I / / :'5 I _, '""'""' ' , ,
GP21005-29 1 w /5 1490+83.56 li(200.00' LT.) " ~ I.J
L LINE

w z z ::J ::J
A / " 3..' ~ 1m
LB 120+29.65 0 0 en .....+ w ..... w ~ en ~ _.. AL 1484+18.55 P.O.E. =
AL 1484+03.87 = ,,./"
LA 1241+69.94 \
AL 1479+59.02 P.C
I:I: / '­ ' " / ""----"'~----'-~S:-TO.:...R.:...M.:...W.:...A.:...T:..:E:.:..R:........:.;TR:..:E:::.A.:..:T.::M:.=E::.:NT.:,1.rfo:..::::..RR:.=IE::::A_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ____::~,'ll ~ LB 120+13.96 l--------~~~::------""t"-~1~4~8~or--~-----t~AL~L~IN~E~v-~;;;,;;~:A:::/T!I\ 1485
SW 1.4 NE 1.4
SEC. 9 / , z\ 1
N 38'57'03" W

\ <3,
LB 118+51 .15 P.T. 1
N 40'57'46" W '~"­ "­
L 1485+79.05 ' \ (200.00' LL/.)
I /5 1487+00.00 " (74.89'RT.) \ 1 /5 1483+81.56 (150.00' LT.) _, "' <( .
LB 131+22.78 < /
SEC.9
FR 1307+46.13 P.I.
LB 131+86.85 " (60 35 ' RT.)
I

15 1483+78.64 (170.28' LT) w w " \
LA 1239+97.80 P.T.
NW 1.4 SE 1.4 ::J :I: (.)
I­ <( :::;; _•....,.-il/~ - - - ~ ~1485 - - - - 7 " / _ ~ - - - N ; B ; R ~ L ~ I N ~ E ~ V - - \ ~ - - . . _\ - \:~::: r-.,-~----~------------1-41-8-0_ _ _ _ _ _ _A_R_L_IN_E_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~ ' ':~l
IN -38'57'04.0"
W: ~ ~ - - - " \ \\
N 37'48'19" W l / /
AR 1484+03.81 =
LA 1243+18.70
AR 1477+31 .23 P.I.
N 34'56'55" W

II 0 ~ /5 1487+61.48 / (185.00'RT.) =
LB 123+13.10 (156.14' RT.)
LEGEND
EXISTING ALIGNMENT
UJUJ ~ 7
BR 1484+17.62 P.O.B. =
LB 122+44 91 · j -~-­ 31 1
MATCH - - - ­ SECTION LINE
FILE NAME c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-19.d!ln
TIME 11 :45:05 AM 2/2/2022
DATE
HillCI
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
DESIGNER
ENTERED BY
CAD OPERA TOR
CHECKED BY
TEAM LEAD
PROJ. ENGR.
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.
REVISION

REGK>N
NO.
I
Note to the Designer: 2) In most situations, alignment information will be combined with right of way information on one plan sheet unless showing both would create too much congestion on the plans, or other conditions listed in PPM DIV. 400.06(9) are met. llN;;­SEE SHEET
AL7 3) In this example the right of way alignment is the same as the construction alignment.
When the right of way alignment is coincidental with the construction centerline then an equation is provided at the begin of project to tie right of way and construction stationing together. Construction stationing is then used to show offset distances to right of way and other contract information.
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES ARE DETERMINED FROM
WASHINGTON COORDINATE SYSTEM NAD 83(91) SOUTH ZONE.
THE COMBINED FACTOR IS DERIVED BY MULITIPLING THE ELEVATION
FACTOR OF 0.99998687 BY THE SCALE FACTOR OF 0.99998159.

0 50 100
SCALE IN FEET 4) Primary control points are displayed in their coordinate location and labeled with the designation ID only. The primary control point table and basis of bearing content will be on the first sheet or the first sheet that can accommodate both without obscuring pertinent sheet information.
Plot 3
STATE
10 IWASI­
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-19
NH-0000(000)

Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 002000
CONTRACT NO.
DATE
BY
BR 1488+99.64 P.T. ~L 123+35.73
B
P.C. - - - - - - - UTILITY EASEMENT
THE DISTANCES SHOWN ARE GROUND DIMENSIONS.
TO OBTAIN THE GRID DIMENSIONS, MULIPLY THE GROUND DIMENSION
BY THE COMBINED FACTOR OF 0.999968460.

BR 1487+81 .53 P.C. 1) The need for this plan is to show alignment information, right of way boundaries and provide data for surveying in right of way. When using contractor surveying, include the necessary stationing detail. /
LB LINE 124+00 - - - ­ TURN BACK LINE · SIXTEENTH SECTION LINE -­ QUART.ER SECTION LINE \ / 1
I, a:: : 1 - - - ­ CONSTRUCTION ALIGNMENT - - - ­ STORMWATER TREATMENT BOUNDARY - - - ­ TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT - - - ­ HIGHWAY RIGHT OF WAY ;;;;;;;;;;;; LIMITED ACCESS RIGHT OF WAY - - - - - - - COUNTY RIGHT OF WAY " "' ,.._----------------------------------.....,-------1
N 41'12'25" W
AR 1478+06.00 P.T.
LOCATION NO.
SP1234
DATE
P.E. STAMP BOX
ALIGNMENT AND RIGHT OF WAY PLAN

All
SHEET
OF
SHEETS QUANTITY TABULATION - SITE PREPARATION
GENERAL NOTES: 0:::
NOTE
THE FIRST NUrv'BER OF THE "CODE' B8-0W REFERS 0
TO THE SHEET NO. OR THE SHEET REFERENCE NO.
SHOWING THE CONSTRUCTION FEATURE 0::: 0 z<(
I

w :) 0 (I) z
LL
Q
0 i== 0 ~ :) 0 0::: ~ tr.i w cc
CODE
LOCATION v \ UNIT OF MEASURE ~ 0 <( 0 cc 0 0::: ...J ti: 0:::
I­ 0 0 ...J ...J <( 0::: 0 0::: <( 0::: 0 0::: 0::: w :)
THE SECOND NUMBER REFERS TO THE
CONSTRUCTION FEATURE FOUND ON THAT SHEET. w zw z<( z 0
I­

::.:: z ::J z w 0 z (I)
LL w 0 ...J <( z ...J <( :) :) <(
I 0... (/) I­ <( (9 <( (9
I 0 0 ~ <( (9 z (9 (9 (9 > 0 > 0 > 0 > 0 0 (9 z > 0 ~ w 0::: 0 0:::
L.S.
L.F. z
Ww >~
Ow ~> w <( z ~ ~ w w z ~ w 0::: 0::: 0:::
S.Y.
L.F. 745 2439

EACH 1 1
L.F.
SP3-1
SP3-2
SP3-3
SP3-4
SP3-5
L 1478+79 (150 LT) TO L 1483+81 (117 LT)
L 1479+99 (147 LT) TO L 1480+52 (217 LT)
L 1481+1 3 (175 LT)

510 87 1. See Special A"ovision , "FILLING OF CULVERTS AND '
SEWER PIPE'. 2. See Special A"ovision "RBv'OVING DRAINAGE
STRUCTURE'. 3. See Special A"ovision , "RBv10VAL OF
STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS". 4. See Special A"ovision , "TEMPORARY TRAFFIC
CONTROL". 5. Culverts in the median that must be filled are to remain functional until no longer needed for Stage 1 drainage. 6. Culvert must remain functional until Structure Code
DRB-34 & DRB-35 are operational. 7. Remove enough of this culvert to construct shoring for
Wall #1 Overexcavation 310
LB 116+76 (40 RT) TO LB 120+12 (36 RT)
SP3-6 LB117+33 (11 LT) TOLB120+11 (B LT)
SP3-7 L 1484+26 (115 LT) TO L 1520+00 (71 LT)
SP3-8 FR 1300+08 (90 RT) TO FR 1346+23 ( 15 RT)
SP3-9 LB 108+85 (84 RT) TO LB 119+28 (662 LT)
SP3-10 L 1490+79 (200 LT) TO L 1492+21 (199 LT)

325 1 275 1 3575 14753 1476 142
SP3-11 L 1482+50 (2 RT) TO L 1490+51 (2 RT)
SP3-12 L 1490+51 (2 LT) TO L 1520+00 (2 RT)
SP3-13 L 1487+88 (71 RT) TO L 1489+32 (60 RT)
SP3-14 LB 122+44 (36 RT) TO LB 123+77 (39 RT)
SP3-15 LB 122+44 (5 LT) TO LB 123+70 (12 LT) 301 3449 150 125 125 2 1 1
SP3-16 L 1484+24 (116 RT) TO L 1489+10 (110 RT)
SP3-17 LB 123+06 (254 LT) TO LB 124+50 (278 LT)
SP3-18 L 1486+71 (178 RT) TO L 1487+57 (180 RT) 3607 204 86
SP4-1 L 1492+99 (188 LT) TO L 1520+00 (188 LT)

2739 220
HAM 1729+56 (75 RT) TO HAM 1731+80 (41 RT) 1 1
H 1730+67 TO H 1732+14
LB 106+75 TO LB 110+80
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

w (I) 1
LB 116+23 (116 RT) TO LB 119+78.68 (115 LT)
SI-EET TOTAL (9 w 0::: 1522 146 105 110
HAM 1730+90 (76 RT) TO HAM 1731+06 (84 RT) w w z ~
L 1468+59 (117 RT) TO L 1483+81 (115 RT)
L 1471+21 (169 RT) TO L 1472+58 (185 RT)
L 1475+02 (173 RT) TO L 1475+28 (147 RT)
L 1475+38 (185 RT) TO L 1475+74 (114 RT)
HAM 1730+73 (47 RT) TO HAM 1730+83 (93 RT) 0::: z
SP2-1
SP2-2
SP2-3
SP2-4

SP6-1
SP6-2
SP6-3
SP6-4
SP6-5 z 0::: 0::: 0...
SP1-1 L 1450+00 (RT) TO L 1457+45 (RT)
SP1-2 L 1458+11 (LT) TO L 1482+50 (RT) w w 3 301 3 3 486 1127 16366 7633 c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-20.d11n 11 :45:07 AM
REGK>N
NO. 2/2/2022 8
I

STATE 290 14549 ...... •
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
10 IWASI­
HillCI
JOB NUMBER
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE
BY
PLAN REF NO

EXAMPLE 4-20
Washington State
Department of Transportation
LOCATION NO.
P.E. STAMP BOX
QTSP1
SHEET
OF
QUANTITY TABULATIONS - SITE PREP
SHEETS

MATCH LINE SEE SHEET SP6
LB LINE 118+00
I ,/--1' ',:
I \ \\-----J,-_
C) i /
CI : \ \, }\ '
C():~ /--1' .__________________:f.G , 1--¥ 1 . -oo---x­ ~ ~ -x-e~ cG --------- 0. ~ j ~
G' ------- cG
I ~x 0 !l!=~,,=,,:,~
I

1
IB
I r\ ' ~:I x~I
Ir ') 'I-,'%, ~:', ro 6 :~le>~ '% :
AL LINE
N a.
Cl)
CG - = ­ CG = -CG ------CG ------CG ----­ .CG- ----­ .CG-----­ -CG-----­ -CG -----­ CG -----­ CG ------CG ------CG ------CG- ----­ .CG-=
I- w w 0 0 + ..... ..... w w ~ w w z
J:

z ::J _:_~:- -~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~~-- ~1--~-8-0 .. .., , :.:r- -x- -x-H -~ \'\, '\_ '\<' (IQ ·,~ '"'\, "& '·\:_,>,~­ ? !i ~ :-­
CG
CG ­ ' "-~':\'$ , ,;~~, , - - 8I &'-•,~\,,", 'o\"'-Etl '­ ''-.;-. '-... ~ "& ,,,_ '-...,..._ - - ~ '•
BL LINE _
CG ­ / '­ 's-, cG ~CG _ _
CG ­ cG ­ cG ­
CG ­ cG ­
I' ~..c,
G~:...-,,•• _- - ----­ ~----­~-~ ~ - - - 1 - - - t 3 1 1 ) 8 ~ . ..._, _
X

- ,,. i::'.::::::."cc{_....,_._., :-,,.c...-,­~c~.:-­.-..,_~,.--,.....,......-_-______________ ___ - ­ -><- -x- -=-x- - x­ - x- ~~~_g - x­ ~~- ~x£G z - c ; --;~c~x­ ­
CG ­ '--------~-,~s..-''"-, - -><­ - -)(~
CG ­ ' ~ r CG ­ > (--- G ­ - \ '\ \ \, ! ..J 8 i \~>~\ ­ -3 -CG- = -CG- = --~~---~~---~~---~~---~~---~f--~~~---~~L---­L-~IN_-_E~~---~~---~~---~~---~~---~~---- - - - - - ~:- - - - - - _J',,
CG ­
CG__ --------------------------------------
F- ------ --­ -14ss----­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --- -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ -­ --­ --14-go --­ --­ -­ --­ -­ - - - - ..............................~..~.::.::...;;;;;;.::.~.~.. :: ~ ~::;;;;::~;; :: ~ ~:: :: ~~::::.;;e7 ········...... • ::J -'
J: -------------------------------------­ ----------------------------------------------------­
I­ (.)
Ii '\ \, :I ',,J,,, , ,,,,: : ~ ----......, ~
I

',:, \ \ t, \ ~ 'V (Jl ~ 5 1, I i \, \ 1 < ·~, n i : i1 i !:8
C> :! , 1480 1,
Q \ ' ' i i --x--x--x- = ~ -x--x--x--x--x- -x--~ - -x- -x- - x - -x yl + _______ cG ­ , !u '• ~.1 ' +
CG ------ e,G
I:le> 1i ti ti 1 \ (J ~I' '!­ };f \ \ : }
I ' ' ('\
CG ­
CG - <I: 11 ,-E 1480
Cl)
I-

w w 0
J: 0 + °' w w ~ w w z z i ::J ci ~:E ----­ ~ o- ------c,r ------ccr -----­cG-----­ l::'G ______ l::'G ______ CG ______ CG ______ CG ______CG ______CG'-'--'--'-'i'. :E ~ a. ::J -'
J: '1
NOTE TO DESIGNER:
REFER TO INFORMATION IN DIVISION 400.06(9) OF THE
PLANS PREPARATION MANUAL FOR HELP IN PREPARING
AN ALIGNMENT PLAN.
IN THIS EXAMPLE THE ALIGNMENT INFORMATION WAS
COMBINED WITH THE SITE PREPARATION
INFORMATION TO FORM ONE PLAN SHEET. COMBINING
THIS INFORMATION IS ACCEPTABLE, (REFER TO DIVISION 400.06(9) OF THE PLANS
PREPARATION MANUAL) AND WAS DONE BECAUSE
THERE WERE EXTENSIVE CONSTRUCTION
EASEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY REVISIONS THAT WERE
BEST VIEWED ON A SEPARATE RIGHT OF
WAY PLAN. IN MOST SITUATIONS, ALIGNMENT
INFORMATION WILL BE COMBINED WITH RIGHT
OF WAY INFORMATION ON ONE PLAN SHEET UNLESS
SHOWING BOTH WOULD CREATE TOO
MUCH CONGESTION ON THE PLANS, OR OTHER
CONDITIONS LISTED IN SECTION 460.09 ARE MET.

QUANTITY TAB NOTE
QUANTITY TAB NOTE CONTINUED
CATCH BASIN r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - CULVERT. -x­ - x­ - x­ - - - x­ - x-
DITCH BOTTOM
FENCE - 1 - - 1 - - 1 - - 1 - -1- GUARDRAIL ·-------------------------­ GRAVEL EDGE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ­ PAVED EDGE .......................................... BRIDGE ;<Z:=-=-=-=-=-=,E=:=c RETAINING WALL
WHEN USING CONTRACTOR SURVEYING, INCLUDE THE
NECESSARY STATIONING DETAIL. - - - - - - - ­ BUILDINGS =======-:::
STREAM EDGE - · --·-­ · --·-··-­ · ­ PAVEMENT REMOVAL BOUNDARY - CG ­
CG ­
CLEARING AND GRUBBING BOUNDARY

FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM. 0
Plot 3

c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-21.d n 11 :45:11 AM 2/2/2022
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERATOR
TEAM LEAD
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM. 50 100
SCALE IN FEET
REGK>N
NO,

STATE
10 WAS
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-21
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 002000
CONTRACT NO.

REVISION
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
SITE PREPARATION PLAN
SP3
SHEET
OF

SHEETS - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ R ~ O ~ A = D.... ~V~,A~Y~S=E~C~T.._O~N~u_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ SEE BRIDGE ------------~R~O~A=D~W~A-=S=EC~T~l=m--~v_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _R_O_A_D_>Y-+'_A_Y_S_E_C_T....,1,...0_IN_T _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
S~CTION
NOTES TO THE DESIGNER: 5.00% L . 5.00% L . /
I B LINE -2.00%
LT. & / r<:,J ) "' ~ 0 !!, ..J ~+ 0 ':f 0 ;t, ;;z ... :z ... w ... 5
C st :::, ':j: IL
N z : : : ..J ~ z ..J w ..J ID z ;: "!o r;ig ~:I 0 ~1/J
N " ...
ID Z
Q.

"
ID [j
T­
I"'"
II ~ -
ID W
Ill "0 ..J ..J oiz::;;iz: ~ ~ 0 + 0
CT'"~ ii! ~~ ~ ifi ~ ~ el ~ ;a:; w 7... -­ .. -, z '! ~ o'i ~ inO ... , w ft iii
N ..J "'• =,; c(
L

" w "" z w ~ '-....... -5.00% RT. ~ " w ' v !,I .,, :::, .., :::, in ai ..J .., ..J
Nz ... c;; ~ IL .­ C ~ ifi f,., IL + :::, ..J ID \ ftft 240 ~ ~~ iii5 ....'+ " 0 ~
N co ..J ... !!;! ... c;; ~~ ~ ~ ~ z s ~~ ... 0 fz 0\
N z 3) BENCHMARK DESIGNATION LINKS TO CONTROL POINT TABLE(S)
IN ALIGNMENT SHEETS .
END :>RQJl:CT
LB I 38+4h.68 ... _j j_ ~ 00 .... <'i ~ I " " ' - - ~ 103% - ~ ~-~~---~=~
ID...i 111...i ID...i 111...i :a w ..J w Q w ..J w ,,­ , , -, \ \ EXISTING GROUND
ID...i ..J w - > ,.,ai a.: > ,.,
DI! :; in + 0\

...N,.;.,. ... 0 :::co ... ~ lll1irl
ID;:-!
IDi;rl .... .... \ .., 0\ > ai ~ ,., > ,., ": ": i:; ~ i]; M
ID ;; a.: >:w ,., ":
N _j _j w w l :t0.~8,-,.
I <..:i a.: > u..i > .... .... "! "! . °' ,., "in~ ~ ,., t. ..... ~ + 0
N ct."":
N
ID ;;i
ID ;;! ID,;;!

'
CENTERIINE
PROFILE GRADE \ 150'V.C..:...,­ 150' v.c. ai \ st "' c:i ~ > <..:i ~ + ...~ '°::: ~~ ... ... ::: +o
CLI ARING Al~D GRUBI ING
2.29 ACRE 0 0 + ........ c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-22.d n 11 :45:13 AM 2/2/2022
DATE
HillCI
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
DESIGNER
ENTERED BY
CAD OPERA TOR
CHECKED BY
TEAM LEAD
PROJ. ENGR.
PROJECT ENGINEER
REGIONAL ADM.
REVISION

SEI DING, FERTILIZING 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 .... .... 0
N +
U)
CLEARING AND GRUBBING
1.141 ACRE + + 00
N +
N 0 0 + ~ ,ND MUL( HING l:MBANKM :NT COMF ACTION 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 0
M
N + + -
N

2791 C.Y.
193 C.Y.
222 Cr<.
SPECIAL EORROW NCL. HAUi
SEEDING I ERTILIZIN G AND MULCHING
1.30 ACRE 0 0 +
1.38 ACRI
ROADWAY EXCAVA ION INCL HAUL
RO DWAY E CAVATIOI INCL. HAUL 1043' C.Y.
EM !ANKMEN COMPACTION 3~285 C.Y.
SPI CIAL BOF ROW INC L. HAUL
34827 C.

9453 "'.Y.
EMBANKMENT < OMPACTION 4341 3 C.Y.
SPECl~L BORR< W INCL. fiAUL 4 982 C.Y.
SEEDING, FERTII IZING AND MULCHll>,IG 2 25 ACRE + ':R 0 - - - - -­ ~ a ,;;-i _j w in
DI!
CLEAl'ING AND GRUBBINt;
N
ID ,;;-i <..:i .. ::: ~ ~ ... ::: .,.o _j ~ st . w ...: + 150' v .c . "'.:
I / ::,H~,.; ;,c,
ROADWAY EMBlNKMENT INCL. HAU

0 a;;! -­ +j .!.3}"/0~ >: +.­ 0 0 w 0 ,.,w ~ ~ _, "'co ": .: ~ 0 0\ . .: <..:i .M :: ...
I:;,.; .... :, c;i+MO\ .....,... _j w a.: _j u! ---­ -==----­
I -
V w <..:i "' > ,., 1,...,--" ~- - - ­ - ­ ~ __ ,_­ _j 300'V.C. '00' v .c . .., u! ;.;, -0.177~, ....00
LB LIN~ 220 ... 0 2,o·v.c . \ 100' V.C. 1........-~--,-i---,..~----....,..j,........._ ~- 230 w + w \ ~ _j ... _j + c( in 1,-; w 0 0 ..J ~ !:! ~ ;! ,.,c:i 200 " ." 0
Q. 1/J in• ..J ..J z ~ "w
Q. :::, 2) NOTE THAT THE IMPORT EMBANKMENT ITEM, GRAVEL BORROW,
ONLY SHOWS UP IN THE ONE SET OF TEN STATION TOTALS.
THAT IS BECAUSE GRAVEL BORROW WILL BE THE SOLE SOURCE
OF
EMBANKMENT MATERIAL IN THIS TEN STATION TOTAL • ROADWAY
EXCAVATION WILL NOT BE USED FOR EMBANKMENT. YOU ONLY
SHOW EMBANKMENT MATERIAL, OTHER THAN ROADWAY
EXCAVATION,
IN TEN STATION TOTALS WHEN IT IS THE SOLE SOURCE OF
EMBANKMENT MATERIAL. REFER TO 700.02.

BM3400S-05 ,.,in 210 1) BID ITEMS LISTED IN THE PROFILE SHEETS FOR TEN STATION
TOTALS ARE LISTED IN THE ORDER AS SHOWN IN THE
STANDARD ITEM TABLE.
CENTE RLINE PR t>FILE GR, DE & Pl\ OT POINl z z ~ 1:1: -
V / 2.00%
T. & RT. / 5.00% Rl. ...... + -
M 0 0 + ~ - 1.20 , CRE 0 0 0 0
U) 00
M + -
M

+ -
FILE NAME
REGK>N
TIME
STATE
NO. 10
WAS
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF. NO.

EXAMPLE 4-22
NH-0000(000)
Washington State
Department of Transportation 002000
CONTRACT NO.
DATE
BY
LOCATION NO.
SP1234
P.E. STAMP BOX

RPS
SHEET
OF
ROADWAY PROFILE
SHEETS STRUCTURE NOTES - DRAINAGE w
Lr.
NOTE: ::J
I­
THE FIRST NUl'v8ER OF THE "CODE DESIGNATION' ::J
BELOW REFERS TO THE SHEET NO. OR THE SHEET

REFERENCE NO. SHOWING THE DRAINAGE
FEATURE
THE SECOND NUl'v8ER REFERS TO THE DRAINAGE
FEATURE FOUND ON THAT SHEET. ::J 0:::
I (f) w (9 <( z ~ 0 z ~ w 0:::
LOCATION v \ UNIT OF MEASURE ~ <( _j ::; -z z
Q ~
EACH 0
X w
I

0 w ~
N <( w 0... >­
I­
I- ...J ...J <( ...J (f) w z w ~ 0 -z (f) 0... w 0... >­0::: 0::: 0... 0::: 0::: 0::: > ...J > ...J > ...J ::J ::J ::J <( <( <( w~ w~ w~ 0 ...J <( ::J ­
I~ (9 a
C.Y.
EACH
TON
L.F. <( ::J w 0... 0::: z 0 0::: w 0... 0 <.o <( 0::: 0 0::: 0::: 0 oO w .
ON (f)

~
L.F. ...J <( ::J ­ oO w .
I~ 0 (f) co
L.F. ...J <( oO w .
I~ 0 (f) 'Sf"
N
L.F.
I­ 0... w 0::: > ...J (9 ::J 0::: w ...J 0 c_j zo
S2 ...J ow <( w 0
I-

0 z z z 0 ::J ­ w 0::: ::J 0
GENERAL NOTES: 0... w 0... <( (9 > 0
CODE ...J 0 --, I­
LL . z~ w­<( 0::: 0 (f) zz :s z <( ­ (9 0... w w 0... >­ >­ u5 u5 0 0
EACH (9
I- ~ cc ("') ("') 0::: cc :::; ~ 0 ...J <( (f)
I­
IO 0 0 ;; ~ 0 .
I a: z . <( 'Sf" 0 w 0 z 0::: <( ~ ~ (f) (f) 0... >z _j <.o sw
N

~
I.()
EACH w z w -z (9 w w (f) w (f)
I-
L.F.
DR1-1 L 1455+04.87 (0.85 LT)
DR1-2 L 1455+04.17 (79.95 LT) TO L 1455+03.20 (133.85 LT)
DR1-3 L 1459+98.73 (0.85 LT) 29 14 1, 9, 11 14
DR1-4 36 1, 9, 11 33 14 1, 9, 11
L 1459+96.86 (82.68 LT) TO L 1459+95.44 (132. 75 LT)

DR2-1 L 1463+98.25 (2.3 LT)
DR2-2 L 1463+97.62 (92.6 LT) TO L 1463+97 .05 (138.04 LT)
DR2-3
DR2-4 233
L 1467+85.76( 112.37 RT ) TO L 1467+95.68 (137.79 LT) 9 7
L 1467+97.54 (92.63 RT) TO L 1467+97.76 (6.85 RT)
DR2-5 L 1467+98.72 (0.59 RT)
DR2-6 1 2 7
L 1467+98.72 (0.59 RT) TO L 1467+97.98 (105.43 LT)
DR2-7 AR 1473+96.44 (48.51 RT)
DR2-8 L 1473+97.88 (1.56 LT) TO L 1473+96 .63 (86.41 LT)
DR2-9 L 1473+96.63 (86.41 LT) TO L 1473+95.06 (130.6 LT)

14 1, 9, 11
DR2-10 AL 1473+99.78 (54.89 LT) TOAL 1483+00.88 ( 175.45 LT)
DR3-1
DR3-2 43
LB 131+60.14 ( 127.07 LT ) TO LB 135+86.41 (73.55 RT)
LB 131+60.14(126.23 LT) TO LB 131+60.57 (83.61 LT) 56 1, 9, 11
DR3-3 LB 131+61.67 (68.75 RT) TO LB 131+62.04 (147.96 RT)
DR3-4 LB 129+94.43 (34.79 LT) 102 1, 9, 11 1
DR3-5 LB 129+92.29 (2.64 RT) 1
DR3-6

LB 129+73.18 (59.08 LT) TO LB 129+72.24 (66.57 RT)
DR3-7
DR3-8
DR3-9
BL 1484+84.19 (1.89 LT) TO BL 1484+73.14 (47.06 LT) 1 1 1
BL 1484+73.14 (47.06 LT) TO BL 1486+47.76(23. 12 LT)
BL 1486+47.76 (23.12 LT) TO BL 1486+47.13(42.3 RT)
DR3-10 BL 1484+86.92 (25.36 RT) TO BL 1486+63.71 (93.74 LT)
DR3-11 BL 1486+74.22 (25.5 LT) TO BL 1487+11 .74 (80.07 LT)
DR3-12 L 1478+97.01 (0.66 LT) TO L 1478+94.00 (87.83 LT)
DR3-13 L 1478+96.83 (54.5 LT) TO L 1479+97.17 (54.5 LT)

98 1, 2, 6 , 14 56 176 65 1, 2, 8, 14 1, 2, 8, 14 1, 2, 13 1, 9 213 1 100 7 7 1, 2 , 6 , 14
DR3-14 L 1479+97.17 (54.5 LT) TO L 1480+97.21 (54.5 LT)
DR3-15 L 1480+97.21 (54.5 LT) TO L 1481+97.21 (54.5 LT) 1 1 100 100 1, 2 , 6,14 1, 2, 6 , 14
DR3-16 L 1481 +97.21 (54.5 LT) TO L 1482+97.26 (54.5 LT)
DR3-17 L 1482 +97.26 (54.5 LT) TO L 1485+97.23 (54.51 LT) 1 1 100 300 1, 2 , 6 , 14 1, 2 , 6 , 14
DR3-18 L 1485+97.23 (54.51 LT) TO L 1486+47.12 (56.15 LT)
DR3-19 L 1486+47.12 (56.15 LT) TO L 1488+72.27 (54.5 LT) 1 1 50 224 1, 2, 6,14 1, 2, 6 , 14
SHEET TOTAL
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

1 6 141 213 c:luserslhillcllpw wsdotld01818551PPM Div 4 Example 4-23.d!ln 11 :45:15 AM 2/2/2022
HillCI
REGK>N
NO.
I STATE 158 233 8
JOB NUMBER
DATE
BY 1369
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-23

Washington State
Department of Transportation
LOCATION NO.
REVISION ...... •
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
10 IWASI­
CONTRACT NO. 2
P.E. STAMP BOX
DATE ~ 1. SEE PIPE ZONE BEDDING AND BACKFILL ­
STANDARD R...AN B-55.20-00. 2. SEE CATCH BASIN TYPE 1L­
STANDARD R...AN B-5.40-00. 3. SEE GRATE INLET TY PE 2 ­
STANDARD R...AN B-35.40-00. 4. SEE FRAME AND DUAL VANED GRATED FOR
GRATE INLET TY PE 2 - STANDARD R...AN
B-40.40-00 ROTA TED INSTALLATION. 5. SEE CATCH BASIN TYPE 2­
STANDARD R...AN B-10.20-00. 6. SEE RECTANGULAR FRAME (RB/ERSIBLE) ­
STANDARD R...AN B-30.10-00 7. EXISTING PIPE OR CULVERT TO BE REMOVED. 8. SEE RECTANGULAR VANED GRATE ­
STANDARD R...AN B-30.30-00. 9. SEE BB/ELED END SECTIONS ­
STANDARD R...AN B-70.20-00. 10. SEE SPECAIL PROVION, "FILLING OF CULVERTS
AND SEWER PIPE''. 11. CONNECTION DETAILS FOR DISSIMILAR
CULVERT PIPE - STANDARD R...AN B-60.20-00. 12. CULVERTS IN THE rvEDIAN THAT MUST BE
FILLED ARE TO RSVV\IN FUNCTIONAL UNTIL NO
LONGER NEEDED FOR STAGE 1 DRAINAGE 13. SEE f\N\NHOLE TYPE 1 ­
STANDARD R...AN B-15.20-00. 14. SEE STORM DRAIN INLET PROTECTION ­
STANDARD R...AN 1-7. 15. SEE SPECAIL PROVION, "ROMOVING DRAINAGE
STRUCTURE'. 16. 17. CLASS 3000CONCRETE TO BE SUBSTITUTED
FOR GRAVEL BACKFILL FOR PIPE ZONE BEDDING. 18. 19. SEE SPILASH PAD DETAILS ON SHEET DD13.

NT1
SHEET
OF
STRUCTURE NOTES - DRAINAGE
SHEETS MATCH LINE SEE SHEET DR6
LB LINE 118+00 \ 3 /
STORMWATER TREATMENT AREA
AL LINE 1480 < 1490 "'
Cl:
Cl

~
I- w w 0 :c 0+ (/) ..... w ..... w (/) w w z z ::J
I- w w 00 :c + (/) ::J z ....J ::J :c ::J ....J :c 0
I­ 0 <(
I­ ::. <( ::. i
LEGEND ~ l1lR2'\ STRUCTURE NOTE CODE 'CD_ STRUCTURE NOTE CODE CONTINUED ::::===:::::=::;;: STREAM EDGE
EXISTING DITCH BOTTOM :; EXISTING CATCH BASIN
ST ­ ==========::
DITCH BOTTOM
STORM SEWER LINE

1) When standard plans can be used to show further detail, make a note on plan directing the reader to them. 2) Use your plans and structure notes in conjunction with each other to assist the plan reader in laying out work.
BOX CULVERT ============ CULVERT 4) In this example, the Standard Plan references are shown on the Structure Notes sheet (Example 4-23). o CATCH BASIN rn GRATE INLET o MANHOLE
FILE NAME
TIME
DATE
PLOTTED BY
DESIGNED BY
ENTERED BY
CHECKED BY
PROJ. ENGR.
REGIONAL ADM.

Notes to the Designer: 3) Drainage codes on the plan sheet correspond with the code numbers on the structure notes sheet. The structure notes sheets provides the stationing and offset distances and quantity of the item, and they also provide other pertinent information in the general notes section to assist the reader. == == === == === == = EXISTING CULVERT - ST ­ °' w ~ w w w z (/) 0
Plot 3 c:luserslhillcllpw_wsdotld01818551PPM_Div_4_Example_4-24.d n 11 :45:20 AM 2/2/2022
HillCI
DESIGNER
CAD OPERA TOR
TEAM LEAD
PROJECT ENGINEER 50 100
SCALE IN FEET
REGK>N
STATE

NO.
10 WAS
JOB NUMBER
FED.AID PROJ.NO.
PLAN REF NO
EXAMPLE 4-24
NH-0000(000) 002000
CONTRACT NO.
REVISION
DATE

BY
LOCATION NO.
XL-1234
P.E. STAMP BOX
Washington State
Department of Transportation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - l
DRAINAGE PLAN
DR3
SHEET
OF

SHEETS I
I
Notes to the Designer: ~ 1) Notice that drainage code is used to show the drainage structure and the pipe that outflows from the structure. 2) Use structure notes to give further details, such as type of pipe, offset distances, new pipe connections, pipe alternatives, pipe treatments, and removal of existing pipe. See example sheet 4-23. "'CD. 1­ t;: iS
I­ ~~ "'
C>"' :8
IL "' lfl :c
I­
IL
U, w ....:....1
C'I""'

....:....1
OT"" ie ~ "' "' "' ~~~ 220 220 210 \"" \~ 1------+~c-=..\>------t-1 0.340% ?nn \"'-.. \~ 1-----+..----..-.,...,-\~ti f----t-;;---.--.--...c,'-