Plans Preparation Manual
M 22-31.09

Engineering and Regional Operations
Development Division, Design Office Foreword
The Plans Preparation Manual is intended to provide instruction and guidance for preparing Right of Way Plans, Contract Plans, Special Provisions, and Estimate packages for a highway construction projects. It also provides direction and links to standards used in the preparation of these plans.
Updating this manual is an ongoing process, and revisions will be issued as required.
Questions, comments, improvements, and ideas are welcome. Please use the Comment Form on the following page to contact us.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page iii Foreword
Page iv Division 1 100.01 100.02 100.03 100.04 100.05 100.06 100.07
Introduction
Vicinity Map and Total Parcel Details
Plan Sheets
Right of Way Acquisition Details
Sundry Site Plans
Parcel Acquisition Plans
Exhibit Maps

100.01
Right of Way Plans 100.08 100.09 100.10 100.11 100.12 100.13 100.14
Access Report Plan
Access Hearing Plan
Special Right of Way Plans
Revisions to Approved Right of Way Plans
Access Control Notes
Archiving R/W Plans
Digital Signatures
Introduction

Right of Way Plans are the official state documents used as the basis to acquire real estate and other property rights. All deeds or other instruments conveying land or interest in land to the state that are to be accepted at the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT)
Headquarters (HQ) must conform to the approved Right of Way Plan. The plans are referred to in legal instruments and are permanently filed for public record at the WSDOT Headquarters in
Olympia.
It is the responsibility of the region to assemble data and prepare plans for the acquisition of rights of way (R/W), including easements, and any substantiating documentation necessary for completion of the plans. Verification of ownership of existing R/W is also required.
To assemble the data, the region requests Assessor’s maps, county road maps, previous state highway base maps and last conveyances for use during early plan preparation. As soon as the parcels from which additional right of way will be acquired are identified, Title Reports with
Assessor’s land areas are requested for use in completing the Right of Way Plans.
Early plan preparation includes the following: • The Region Real Estate Services Manager is consulted to determine the degree of property interests to be acquired, such as fee title, easements, and temporary construction easements. • The Region Right of Way Manager is consulted to determine whether existing plans are adequate for revisions or a new Right of Way Plan should be prepared. • The Region Utilities Engineer is consulted to determine the extent of utility interests to be addressed.
Complete Right of Way Plans consist of a Vicinity Map and Right of Way Plan sheets. Right of
Way Plans are to be prepared in English units only. 100.02
Vicinity Map and Total Parcel Details

The Vicinity Map supplies general information depicting the project in relation to surrounding communities, public and private road networks, traffic movement patterns, and other local
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-1 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 features. A total parcel detail and parcel number are included for any ownership too large to be shown on individual plan sheets (see Example 1-1).
A heavy line is used to indicate the new highway. Lighter lines in varying weights show interchanges, connecting road systems, bodies of water, and so on. Limited access, the existing right of way, and/or the proposed right of way are not shown. Detail and drafting requirements are set forth in the WSDOT Electronic Engineering Data Standards (EEDS) Manual (see
Deliverables Sections 4, 7, 8, and Symbology 4). 100.03
Plan Sheets
New base maps shall be prepared in their correct geographically coordinate location. It is recommended the design team use information from the Record of Survey or other reliable source to locate the base map in its Geographic Location. This will allow measurements within the sheet to be correct and for future use within WSDOT’s GIS program.
The sheets are to be single sheet per file. This allows the sheets to be signed and edited without affecting other sheets. It also allows multiple users to work within the project at the same time.
All submittals shall be placed in the appropriate ProjectWise folder structure per the WSDOT
EEDS Deliverables 8.08(2). A link to the proposed revision shall be placed on the Cover Sheet for each submittal.

100.03(1)
Alignment
Right of way is legally described from the R/W centerline. Show existing and proposed R/W centerlines as a continuous solid line the entire length of the project with existing and proposed alignment data. Show additional non-controlling centerlines using a dashed line without alignment data.
It is preferable that the main line R/W centerline not have a letter designation (such as LR Line) unless there is more than one main line centerline. Therefore, the Highway Engineer’s Station (HES) will no longer have a letter designation.
A proposed centerline stationing must have ties, by station and/or bearing equations, to existing
R/W centerline stationing at the beginning and end of the new plan.
It is recommended that all proposed plans should replace existing spiral curves on the proposed
R/W centerline with a simple circular curve in conformance with current design standards.
When proposed R/W is to be acquired, the proposed R/W alignment will conform to the new simple curve. If additional R/W is not to be acquired, the existing R/W alignment will retain the original spiral curve. The proposed plan will reference the superseded spiral alignment (see
Examples 1-9a and 1-9b). Prior to plan preparation, consultation with the HQ Right of Way Plans
Section is advised.

Page 1-2
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans 100.03(2)
Control Features
Plan sheets must show government subdivision corners, platted subdivisions, donation land claims, state and national park/forest boundaries, and Indian reservations. Show stations where government subdivision lines intersect our highway centerline. Add a cross-reference note to the Monumentation Map or Record of Survey prepared for the project. 100.03(3)
Right of Way Details (a) Right of way lines are continuous. These lines are shown crossing city streets, county roads, rivers, and railroads, and they must match adjoining projects. Where a first-time improvement is planned, the existing county road or city street rights of way are enclosed by a right of way line or turnback line and are identified for later conveyance to the appropriate agency.
Data must be supplied to describe the right of way for its entire length from a centerline or, if necessary, from a metes and bounds description. Any existing right of way line retained as an ultimate right of way line for the new project is tied to and described from the proposed centerline or by a metes and bounds description. Ties to a previous centerline are not acceptable (see Example 1-2). When the existing right of way line is to be retained as an ultimate right of way line and is offset from an existing spiral alignment, consideration should be given to buying, selling, or exchanging small pieces of land with the adjacent owner to eliminate this offset spiral right of way line.
Right of way widths and centerline stations are shown at the beginning and end of each sheet, except if in a taper, and at all points of change in width of the right of way. No point shall be double-described (that is, by a metes and bounds description and a station and offset) or by stations and offsets from two centerlines. All dimensions and areas must be shown on the final Right of Way Plan. (b) A turnback line is shown as that line between right of way needed for highway purposes and right of way that will be relinquished to others (see Example 1-2). Areas for relinquishment are areas the state acquires for the improvement or construction of roads that will not remain a part of the highway system. The plan must show the areas being relinquished in sufficient detail and accuracy to allow a legal description to be written for the conveyance instrument (for example, stations and offsets or metes and bounds). (c) An easement is a permanent or long-term right to enter upon the property of another for a defined purpose. Easements involve perpetual or temporary rights, which are noncancelable by the property owner during the term of the easement. For example, an easement is used when the state is to construct a facility that does not require ownership of fee title (such as slope or drainage), and the acquisition of an easement right will save the department substantial funds in acquisition costs.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-3

Right of Way Plans
Division 1
The type of easement is defined on the Right of Way Plan (such as drainage easement, slope easement, or temporary construction easement) and is described by stations and offsets or by metes and bounds. Each type of easement and the area for each specific type is included in the ownership block under the Easement column opposite the appropriate parcel number (see Example 1-2).
Third-party easements, such as utility or ingress/egress easements, that cross a parcel for the benefit of others will be shown on the plan.
State highways crossing state and federal lands, are generally acquired as an easement.
To define the highway margins and to have a consistent right of way line, these areas are shown as if fee title is acquired. Other areas where this may be encountered may include railroad, large land owners and utility rights of way crossings. (d) A permit is a temporary right to enter upon the property of another for a defined purpose. These rights are issued for a limited time period—usually expiring upon completion of construction. Permits do not encumber the owner’s property, are nontransferable, and are cancelable by the grantor. Construction permits are not shown on the Right of Way Plans. (e) An airspace corridor is a three-dimensional corridor of a specific width and length between two elevations. Airspace corridors are acquired in fee, and all rights of ownership apply to them. An airspace corridor is usually used where the highway is on a structure or in a tunnel. The property lying under or above the corridor may be used for other purposes as long as there is no detrimental effect on the highway facility. When the highway is on a structure, the only property acquired in fee would be the area needed to support the footings of the structure. (f) Many Right of Way Plans contain an extreme amount of detail and will assign a point number to a specific location. A line table is used to identify the station, offset, and sometimes the elevation of each point. A separate table should be used for each feature such as R/W acquisition, easements, and air space corridors with a unique number assigned to each point.
Plans utilizing multiple tables should place all tables on a separate plan sheet. This will allow for future table revisions without interfering with plan sheet line work. Each table should include a description of the specific feature and each feature should be shown in a separate table (see Examples 1-16a –1-16e). (g) Surplus property is property that was acquired as operating right of way but is no longer needed as such. A plan revision mapping the surplus property area is necessary prior to disposal.
Property that was acquired for uses other than operating highway right of way and is no longer needed is also labeled as surplus property on the Right of Way Plan prior to
Page 1-4
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Division 1
Right of Way Plans disposal. Some examples of surplus property would be unneeded pit sites, quarry sites and maintenance sites.
Right of Way Plans are not revised to show surplus properties until both the region and
Headquarters have completed their Surplus Property Review. If federal funds were used for the acquisition of right of way or construction of the facility, Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) approval is required before a plan revision can be approved.
Disposal of uneconomic remainders does not need a plan revision. (h) Property required for rest areas, historical markers, park & ride lots, truck weighing stations, wetlands mitigation areas, storm water treatment areas, landscape areas, and plan sheets. If these facilities are situated beyond the reasonable limits of the plan, the sites are shown on a Sundry Site Plan (see Section 100.05). Material and stockpile sites are not shown on Right of Way Plans unless they are adjacent to the right of way and are fully describable thereon. Otherwise, they are shown on the Right of Way Plan with a note cross referencing the Sundry Site Plan where they are described. (i) An Inventory Control Number (ICN) may be added to the plan to identify long-term leases or easements (typically 20 years or longer) and surplus property. Refer to the
Surplus Property Review package to determine whether a plan revision is necessary. If an ICN will be added to the plan, the plan revision will normally identify the parcel or easement limits, the IC number, and the area.
Most ICN plan revisions will be prepared by the HQ Right of Way Plans Section. HQ
Right of Way Plans Section will coordinate the plan revision with the HQ and region
Property Management sections.

100.03(4)
Access Control
Limited access hachures define control of access between a highway facility and all other abutting property (see Example 1-3). On the title block of the plan sheet, the HQ Access and
Hearings Office specifies the type of control: full, partial, or modified. If a transition is made from one type to another, the title block on the affected plan sheet includes both types and the plan sheet is labeled at the transition station. Specific considerations are: • If the route has been designated for limited access control by the Secretary of
Transportation, access control must conform to the Design Manual Chapter 530) unless advance approval for a design analysis is obtained. • On federal-aid routes, changes in access features from those that have been approved by
FHWA require concurrence from FHWA prior to WSDOT approval under Certification
Acceptance procedures authorized by FHWA. • Limited access hachures are not shown when crossing railroad operating property, grade intersections, crossroads, or interchanges (see Example 1-3).
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-5 Right of Way Plans
Division 1

• At separation structures where there is no access to the highway lanes, the hachures are continuous, and traffic movement is permitted over or under the structures by note (see
Section 100.12). • In areas of partial or modified access control, approaches are allowed, but the hachures are never omitted. Each approach is defined in the access approach schedule (see Example 1-6). • Existing Limited Access Plans must be reviewed (deeds examined) for previously deeded access approaches. • The limits of access control hachures are shown on all crossroads, frontage roads, and so on.
Non-highway use of right of way (such as parking, storage, or buildings) requires an airspace lease (see the Right of Way Manual). When requested by HQ Real Estate Services, the plan sheets will clearly delineate the limits and character of the multiple-use area.
On new plans, the access control hachures may, in very limited instances, be moved to a precisely dimensioned invisible line, with the area labeled for the specific use and a turnback line and relinquishment notes provided if necessary. This is known as “Floating Hachures.”
On existing plans where access rights have been acquired, or on new plans where circumstances dictate retention of departmental control of the multiple-use area, the access hachures are carried on the right of way line and the other usage is shown by an access note.
Access notes concerning routine maintenance of utilities within the highway right of way are added to the plan following approval of the pertinent franchise or permit.
Modifying existing approved Limited Access hachures on an approved plan will require either
FHWA approval or approval from the HQ Access & Hearings Manager. Contact the HQ Access and Hearings Office to determine the appropriate process. 100.03(5)
Access Approach Schedule
The access approach schedule and the access control notes supply all the information necessary for the granting of private approaches, and should reflect the language intended.
The access approach schedule furnishes, in tabular form: 1. The name of the owner, utility, or agency. 2. The station or station limits left or right of centerline. 3. The type of approach, and any access notes added.
Duplication of 1 above can be avoided by adding columns 2 and 3 to the ownership block, thereby showing all data pertinent to one ownership on one line (see Example 1-6).
Approaches that are granted shall be shown in the access approach schedule only on the sheet on which the approach appears.

Page 1-6
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans
Parcel number is on the sheet where the parcel first appears. 100.03(6)
Railroad Easement Details
A longitudinal easement is acquired from a railroad company when adjacent highway requirements overlap railroad property. The easement line is labeled and drawn the same weight as the right of way line. At beginning and end of the easement, show the highway station with equivalent railroad station. Offset distances to the easement line are taken perpendicular to each centerline. Under certain conditions, it may be necessary to describe the easement using railroad stationing by a metes and bounds description.
The crossing by a highway over, under, or at the grade of railroad property is by a crossing easement. The highway station with an equivalent railroad station is shown at each corner of the crossing easement and at the intersection of the railroad centerline and the R/W centerline.
Access hachures are not to be carried across the railroad tracks, but are usually shown along the highway-railroad right of way or easement lines. The easement is labeled as a crossing easement. Separate areas for each type of easement are shown in the ownership block (see
Example 1-2). 100.03(7)
Drawing Standards

Right of Way Plans are to be prepared in CAD with US survey foot units only, in conformance with the WSDOT Electronic Engineering Data Standards (EEDS) Manual (M 3028). Right of Way
Plan revision requests will be submitted to WSDOT HQ Right of Way Plans Office to be reviewed, verified and commented prior to approval. Any corrections to be made will be noted and sent back to the Requestor starting as Correction Notice No. 1. Right of Way Plan revisions will be stored in ProjectWise. CAD levels, colors, line weights, symbols, base and sheet deliverables are to conform to the standards shown in the EEDS Manual. Right of Way Plans are prepared using ground dimensions.
The right of way Vicinity Map and plan sheets should include the following information, as applicable: • Plans are to be oriented with the Highway Engineers’ stations, increasing from left to right on the main line and ramps. It is desirable for mileposts to run in the same direction as stationing. Beginning stations on ramps should start at 10+00. When existing surveys conflict with this procedure, the R/W line should be re-stationed as stated above if new plans are drawn. • All centerlines that are used to describe right of way should have bearings and stationing.
Note: Do not use station or bearing equations within a proposed Right of Way Plan alignment. However, station and/or bearing equations can be used at the beginning and/or end of a new Right of Way Plan. Centerline mileposts are treated in the same manner. Mile
Post equations are shown only at the beginning and end of new alignment plans. • Mileposts at the beginning and end of the plan. The total length of the plan is shown only on the first sheet of the Vicinity Map.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-7 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 • Centerline stationing and destination arrows are shown at the beginning and end of each sheet. The destination arrow shall refer to the nearest town, city, highway junction, or other major feature. Do not start or end a new plan set at the centerline of intersecting roads. • On plan sheets use 5 Station numbers, such as 10+00 and 15+00. On the Vicinity Map, use
10 Station numbers, such as 10+00 and 20+00. Place the numbers parallel to and above the centerline. • Beginning and end of plan cross-references to current contiguous plans are placed close to the beginning or end of plan note. • New plans superseding an existing plan, each plan sheet will have a note stating the stationing, sheet number, name, and approval date of the plan being superseded by the new plan (see Example 1-2). • Names of all interchanges, highways, city streets, county roads, railroads, and bodies of water. • Highway structures shown in their correct location, drawn to scale, and identified as overcrossing or undercrossing in relation to the main line traffic movement. (Is the highway crossing over a structure or running under a structure?) • Traffic movement pattern indicated by arrows on centerline, with the appropriate numeral added for multiple lanes. • Townships, Ranges, government subdivisions, and platted subdivisions right reading with map and a north arrow for orientation purposes. • Section and quarter-section numbers right-reading with north. Quarter-Quarter labeling is aligned with the bottom of the sheet. • Corporate limit and county boundaries indicated with the name of the city placed on the city side of the corporate limit line (see Example 1-1). • Parcel identification numbers and total ownership boundaries (see Section 100.04) of parcels too large to be shown on a plan sheet are shown on the vicinity map. An
Ownership block is not placed on the Vicinity Map. In the ownership block, show the name of the vested owner and the name of any contract purchaser in parentheses behind the vested owner. • Parcel identification number should be placed as nearly as practical in numerical order above the highway first and then below the highway (assuming the highway is running in an east – west direction). This allows users to find a parcel number on the sheet quickly. • When using the centerline as a match line, always use the smaller number above the larger number (see Example 1-1).

Page 1-8 Division 1
Right of Way Plans • Ownership or property dots are shown around the total parcel or contiguous parcels having the same owner. This helps identify potential assessment, access and condemnation issues.
These dots may be revised, as needed, when that particular parcel is affected by a revision. • Major utility transmission rights of way and tower numbers (if applicable). Other utility distribution lines should not be shown unless replacement right of way is being purchased. • Turnback lines labeled and areas identified for conveyance (relinquishment, certification, or transfer) to the appropriate agencies are identified. • Mitigation Areas (i.e. Stormwater Treatment, Wetlands Mitigation or other mitigation facilities) are not part of the operating right of way and considered non-highway use areas.
The right of way line will encompass these areas to include them within the operating R/W if they are within the city limits and may or may not be included if they are within county limits. • Scale: Vicinity Map, 1 inch to 500 feet; Plan Sheets, 1 inch to 50 feet, unless special approval for a deviation is obtained from the HQ Right of Way Plans Manager. • All public land identified by the agency name (for example, Snoqualmie National Forest) and a parcel number—except that WSDOT land is identified as WSDOT only. • Grade intersection stations for all county roads. City street intersections are not labeled.
Label includes centerline station equation and whether the intersection is left, right or both. A county road label designation is also included if improvement activities are being administered. (See Example 1-3) • Basis of Bearings note should be included on all new Right of Way Plan sheets. Information included in the Basis of Bearings description shall include the monuments defining each end of the base line bearing (for example, the north line of the northwest quarter of
Section 1). The coordinate value of each end of the line may also be provided but must include the reference system Datum (i.e. -83/2011 adj, and north or south zone). The monuments used to control the Basis of Bearings line shall be shown on the plan, either on the specific plan sheet or the Vicinity Map. • A cross-reference note to the corresponding Monumentation Map or Record of Survey is included on all new Right of Way Plans. • On complex Right of Way Plans, a sheet layout diagram should be shown on the Vicinity
Map (see Example 1-1). • The Limit of Plan identifies the termination of a controlling center line of an intersecting state highway (see Examples 1-1 and 1-9A). Limit of Plan stations are limited to intersecting state highways. Limit of Plan stations are not used on county or city roads being improved by WSDOT.
Owner Verification Note is added to all plan sheets, except vicinity map.
When appropriate, add Access Approach Schedule and access notes.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 1-9 Right of Way Plans
Division 1
It is not necessary for the project limits of a new Right of Way Plan to match the project limits of the corresponding PS&E plan. A new Right of Way Plan should be extended whenever possible so that an entire Right of Way Plan sheet can be superseded. Do not leave short segments of an existing Right of Way Plan while superseding the remainder. It is advisable to contact the HQ
Right of Way Plans Section prior to developing a new plan to determine the final extent of the new Right of Way Plan.
Notes, dimensions, subdivision information, and similar data are added after the right of way limits for each sheet are established, to avoid relocation of this data at later stages of plan development. Drawings are not to be extended beyond the border of the sheet.
Existing monuments that are used to tie the R/W centerline shall be identified on the
Monumentation Map or Record of Survey.
It is recommended that the R/W line not be coincident to a private property line. If the R/W Line or easement line does follow a private property line, it should be stationed to the nearest foot plus or minus (see Example 1-3). It is possible to have a situation where the station is held more exact and the offset is given the plus or minus dimension.
Topographic information should be kept to a minimum, but should be sufficiently complete to indicate the affects of the proposed right of way on new parcels. No symbols for vegetation are used except for the outline of orchards or similar features directly related to the production of income from a particular property. All improvements, including wells, septic tanks, and drain fields on new parcels 100 feet or less from the proposed right of way line, are labeled and dimensioned to the nearest foot from R/W centerline if known. Distances to buildings should be dimensioned to the nearest part of the building (normally the roof overhang). Distances shall be placed outside the R/W; distances to fences, sidewalks, and so on are not shown. Match Lines are shown at a specific station perpendicular to the centerline.
Location information for aquatic features such as rivers or river banks, lakes, and other water boundaries should be shown to the nearest foot only.
There shall be no overlap of right of way between plan sheets or adjoining plans.
When coincident lines are encountered, the following order of procedure is used: 1. Right of Way Centerline (Baseline) and Right of Way line 2. Construction Centerline 3. Turnback, easement or Surplus line 4. Township or Range line 5. Section Line 6. Corporate Limit Line

Page 1-10
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans 7. County Line- when corporate limits line coincide the Corporate Limits line will be labeled in an effort to clarify that the line is also the Corp. Limits line. 8. Property line 100.03(8)
Additional Important Details
Review these reminders and commonly overlooked details to help expedite your R/W processing. (a) Follow conventions provided in the WSDOT Electronic Engineering Data Standards (EEDS). All computerized drafting will meet WSDOT standards per this manual. (b) Split Plans: Submit the R/W plan revision with the corresponding revision to the access plan. If the plan showing access title is different, then the redline needs to be submitted under a separate transmittal letter. (c) If a revision affects the vicinity map (and/or total parcel detail), then it also needs to be revised. (d) Show the Total parcel detail. (e) Submit complete Title reports. (f) Show subdivision plat name on R/W plan if it is referred to in the title report. Submit copy of plat. (g) Upgrade the topography, such as buildings, parking areas, driveways. (h) Provide complete R/W description by station and offset or by metes and bounds. (i) Do not double describe the R/W. (j) Label grade intersections for county roads. (k) Show turnback lines and relinquishment information. (l) DNR Property: Supply all the required information to develop the land plat. (m) Do not describe R/W from the construction centerline and do not show the construction centerline on the R/W plans, unless needed to show traffic movements. (n) Describe areas: Choose either acres or square feet to describe area for each parcel. (o) Do not use the same parcel number from a parcel that has been closed or a parcel number that has been deleted (and noted “NOT USED”) from the same plan title. (p) Redline plan: use the latest approved R/W Plan. (q) Railroad easements: provide ties to railroad stationing and offsets (Longitudinal and crossing easements). (r) Understanding of construction permits vs. easements. (s) Purpose of revision on the transmittal letter. It should be an explanation as to why the revision is requested or needed, not just a reiteration of the changes themselves. (t) Spell check all transmittals. (u) Stating the proposed project advertisement date in the transmittal letter, can help expedite the processing of plan revisions.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-11 Right of Way Plans 100.03(9)
Division 1
Transmittal Requirements
After the plans have been reviewed by the Region Right of Way Plans Office, a transmittal package shall be generated and stored in ProjectWise per WSDOT Electronic Engineering Data
Standards Manual Deliverables Section 8.08(2). The following are to be included in the transmittal: (a) A letter listing all items transmitted, including the Plans, Specifications, and Estimates (PS&E) title. (b) Current work order information. (c) A numbered Title Report for each parcel. (d) Copies of calculations completed to determine the right of way centerline, parcel limits, parcel areas, and any other pertinent data (i.e.- ALG file, clearance reports, etc.). (e) One copy of each subdivision plat referred to in Title Reports. (f) One copy of each plan sheet (adjoining or underlying plans) requiring revision or superseding as a result of the new plan. Proposed revisions are to be shown in color (red will be added to the plan sheet, green will be deleted or crossed out, blue will provide notes or instructions for clarification) and submitted in accordance with
Section 100.09 (see Example 1-8). (g) If the project has been established as a limited access facility, the region shall make certain that the entire hearing procedure was carried to completion (see Design Manual
Chapter 210) and shall include supporting documentation in the transmittal (i.e. letters of approval from FHWA or the region ASDE.) Check with the HQ Access and Hearings
Office for the required process. (h) If a plan shows railroad facilities, federal lands, safety rest areas, park & ride lots, or sundry sites, acknowledgment of compliance with the following requirements is to be furnished: 1. Applicable portions of the Utilities Manual. 2. Sundry Site Plan. 3. Safety rest areas: A copy of the approval by the HQ Hydraulics Section (see Design 4. Highways Over National Forest Lands, Memorandum of Understanding, M 22 50

100.03(10)
Headquarters Processing
The HQ Right of Way Plans Section will make a final review of the plan, coordinate the review with other offices as required, and provide a PDF copy of each sheet. After review of the changes by Headquarters, and with region concurrence, the responsible Professional Engineer will stamp and digitally sign each sheet in a PDF file format. The region has the option to have a
Professional Land Surveyor also stamp and digitally sign them. This stamp will be placed above
Page 1-12
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans the title block. The electronic file(s) will then be transmitted to the HQ Right of Way Plans
Section where they will be approved and adopted for the applicable phase authority.
Following approval, the plan(s) will be placed into the approved electronic content management system for access by the regions, HQ Real Estate Services, and other plan users.
For revisions to original plans, see Section 100.11.
ProjectWise is the file management software used to maintain current and date related versions of specific revised sheets.

100.03(11)
Superseded Plans
When all or a portion of an existing Right of Way Plan is superseded by a new plan, the superseded plan must be revised to identify the portion of the plan that has been superseded. It is the region’s responsibility to submit a plan revision identifying the superseded plan or portion thereof. A superseding plan revision may be submitted at the same time as the new plan.
However, the superseded plan revision will not be processed and approved until the superseding plan has been approved. 100.04
Right of Way Acquisition Details
Whenever possible, the total boundary of each parcel affected by the highway improvements is included on the plan sheets. Parcels that cannot be shown entirely on the plan sheet are included on the Vicinity Map. The total parcel detail must be clearly shown in relation to the highway facility. Sufficient data must be supplied to ensure each area of acquisition required for the project can be legally described.
The Project Development Office, working with Real Estate Services, can obtain total area for parcels shown on the Right of Way Plan from the County Assessor’s Office. The title companies are also requested to include areas from Assessor's records in the Title Reports, and these areas are entered in the “Total Area” boxes on the Right of Way Plans.
A greater degree of precision is required to plot the boundaries of parcels where land values are high (such as urban areas and development tracts). Where land values are high and/or ownerships consist of lots, blocks, or small tracts, the areas are shown to the nearest square foot. Larger areas are generally defined by a Public Lands Survey and may be specified in acres.
Right of way acquisitions are calculated to the nearest square foot or hundredth of an acre, except in the case of federal or Indian lands. These lands are calculated to the nearest thousandth of an acre, which is a federal requirement. Copies of computer sheets of calculations initiated by the region are provided, with the plans, to the HQ Right of Way Plans Section to expedite the review process. (100.03(8)(d)). 100.04(1)
Final Documentation

The following ownership information is submitted by the region to the HQ Right of Way Plans
Section in Olympia.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-13 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 (a) A Title Report (less than five years old) is required for each parcel from which WSDOT is acquiring property, easements, and/or access rights. These reports are also examined for easements or permits granted to owners of property that does not abut the highway but is affected by the new highway facility. (b) Property parcel identification numbers are assigned consecutively for every parcel involved from the beginning to the end of the project. Each number consists of six digits, of which the first shall be the region prefix: 1 - 00000 = Northwest Region 2 - 00000 = North Central Region 3 - 00000 = Olympic Region 4 - 00000 = Southwest Region 5 - 00000 = South Central Region 6 - 00000 = Eastern Region
The region assigns the parcel number for use within its jurisdiction and it is used on all
Right of Way Plans, preliminary commitments, deeds, easements, or other substantiating data.
The assigned number will identify the property for all future departmental use; however, a division of or additional acquisition from an existing parcel must be assigned a new six-digit parcel number. Letter suffixes to an existing number are prohibited.
When new acquisitions occur on a plan that has had a previous acquisition, the existing parcel number is arrowed into the previous acquisition. The new parcel number is placed within the new parcel. The ownership block will retain the previous parcel number information, including the areas. When a parcel previously had a partial acquisition, and an additional acquisition is proposed on the same plan, the previous parcel number is placed within the previous area associated with that acquisition. If the area is too small, a leader line is drawn from the previous parcel number into the area that was acquired. A new parcel number is placed within the parcel indicating additional acquisitions are to take place.
If a parcel is acquired in total, followed by a new plan, a new WSDOT cartouche is placed within the parcel (see Example 1-13).
The number is used as shown in Example 1-2. (c) The areas of total ownership, right of way required for highway use; property remaining right and left of the right of way centerline; easements; and permits are shown in a tabular listing on each plan sheet. In most cases, the total area is obtained from the
County Assessor’s Office.
When an individual ownership extends to more than one plan sheet, area tabulations will be placed on the first plan sheet that shows that parcel. In the case of Limited
Access Approaches, the Access Approach Schedule will appear on the sheet the approach is located on, by station.

100.05
Sundry Site Plans
The original intent of the Sundry Site Plan was to provide a source of material for highway construction projects. Today, most projects use contractor-furnished sites, so pit sites are no
Page 1-14
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans longer shown on Sundry Site Plans. Current use includes functions such as ferry terminals, wetlands mitigation sites, park & ride lots, and storm water retention or other reclamation sites.
A Sundry Site Plan is used to map property that cannot be shown on a Right of Way Plan. Sundry
Site Plans are to be prepared in English units only. Preferably, sites used by WSDOT are acquired in fee. Some sites may be acquired with an easement or lease.
Pit sites (PS), quarry sites (QS), stockpile sites (SP), and waste sites (WS) are identified by a system that uses two letters, followed by the county letter designation (shown on the following list) and the site number. For example, quarry site number 25 in Thurston County is shown as
QS-J-25. Sites such as ferry terminals, wetlands mitigation areas, park & ride lots, and so on, are identified by name rather than a letter designation and site number; for example, Edmonds
Ferry Terminal, Snoqualmie Wetlands Mitigation Area, and Marvin Road Park & Ride Lot.
The following list shows the county letter designations:
County

100.05(1)
Letter
Adams
AD
Grays Harbor
H
Pierce
B
Asotin
AN

Island
IS
San Juan
SJ
Benton
R
Jefferson
Y
Skagit
M

Chelan
K
King
A
Skamania
SA
Clallam
Q
Kitsap
I

Snohomish
D
Clark
G
Kittitas
S
Spokane
C
Columbia
CO

Klickitat
Z
Stevens
W
Cowlitz
N
Lewis
L
Thurston
J

Douglas
DO
Lincoln
T
Wahkiakum
WA
Ferry
FY
Mason
X

Walla Walla
O
Franklin
FN
Okanogan
U
Whatcom
F
Garfield
GA

Pacific
V
Whitman
P
Grant
GT
Pend Oreille
PO
Yakima
E

Site Selection
Site selection should be based at least in part on the following criteria: (a) Site investigation by the Region Materials Engineer and the Region Landscape Architect. (b) Permanency. (c) Size and space (sufficient to accommodate all current and/or future operations). (d) Cost. (e) Aesthetic values.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-15 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 (f) Single ownership, if possible. (g) Unimproved low-valued land. Purchase of improved or valuable land should be avoided unless acquisition of the site is cost-effective (the savings in haul compensate for the cost of the site). (h) Consideration of all other available sources, including private, commercial, and other
WSDOT sites. (i) Presence of wetlands, aquifers, farmlands, flood plains, historical or archaeological sites, or other environmentally sensitive lands. 100.05(2)
Plan Submittal
Before beginning work on a Sundry Site Plan the Region R/W Plans Office should meet with
Region Real Estate Services and the project office to determine the anticipated use of the site and whether it will be a total or partial acquisition. This information can be used to determine the elements to be located within the site and whether a Record of Survey will be required.
Specific information to be included and submitted with a Sundry Site Plan is as follows: (a) Site number or name. (b) Title Reports and parcel identification numbers. (c) Area calculations: • Total • Right of Way Acquisition • Remainder (d) If a survey was completed for this site, provide a cross-reference note to the Record of
Survey. (Highly recommended to determine legal description discrepancies, if any, or encroachments) (e) Except for Sundry Site Plans referenced to a Record of Survey, described by aliquot parts, or defined by platted lot and block, all alignments and parcels shown on the plan will be tied to a minimum of two General Land Office corners or State Plane Coordinate control points. (f) Access information if site does not abut a public road system (g) Location of buildings and other structures, fences, wells, septic systems, and any other features necessary for appraisal purposes. (h) All easements shown on parcels acquired for the purpose of structure construction. (i) Scale drawing with dimensions of sundry site on a 22-inch x 34-inch reproducible sheet (see Examples 1-10, 1-11, and 1-12). (j) Vicinity Map.

Page 1-16
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans 100.05(3)
Sundry Site Plans That Reference a Record of Survey
Many Sundry Site Plans now include setting property corners of the acquisition area. However, the final acquisition often differs from the original plan once negotiations are complete. In order to avoid resetting property corners, the following procedure has been established. (a) The Sundry Site Plan is prepared and approved based on the anticipated needs of the project. (b) Once negotiations are complete and the property has been acquired, the property corners are set. (c) The Record of Survey is filed and an Auditor’s File Number (AFN) is assigned to the survey. (d) The Sundry Site Plan is then revised, adding the Record of Survey AFN to the plan. 100.05(4)
Headquarters Processing
The HQ Right of Way Plans Section will make a final review of the plan, coordinate the review with other offices as required, and send back to the region a link to a Project Wise folder of each sheet. After review of the changes by Headquarters, and with region concurrence, the responsible Professional Engineer will digitally stamp and sign each sheet in a PDF file format.
The region has the option to have a Professional Land Surveyor also stamp and sign the sheets(s). This stamp will be placed above the title block. Once the sheets are signed, the HQ
Right of Way Plans Section will be notified and the sheets will be approved and adopted.
Following approval, the plan(s) will be placed into the approved electronic content management system for access by the regions, HQ Real Estate Services, and other plan users.
For revisions to original plans, see Section 100.11.
ProjectWise is the file management software used to maintain current and date related versions of specific revised sheets.
Right of Way projects will be managed in ProjectWise per the WSDOT EEDS Manual Division 8.
The current standard structure will be verified or provided by HQ Right of Way Plans Section upon revision submittal request. Existing project structures will be migrated to the current standard structure including associated data and previous revision submittals. This structure will include the following: •

Project folder name including beginning Mile Post and abbreviated plan set name. For
Example: 274.12GrahamRdtoCraigVic •
Project properties/attributes including plan information and plan sheet title. • \HQ_RW_CurrentCad. Current base and sheet files representing the R/W project. This folder is to be maintained and revised by HQ Right of Way Plans and HQ Real Estate
Services only. Regions may reference the files for proposed revisions and then include the resulting CAD files with the submittal package.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-17 Right of Way Plans 100.06
Division 1 • \Letter_yyyy-mm-dd. This folder is copied from the available template per WSDOT EEDS
Deliverables 8.08(2) and populated by the region submitting a proposed revision. • \MicroStation_63Levels. This optional folder contains the original legacy standard CAD files for information only. • \PDF-Original Scans. This folder contains the last scanned hardcopy sheets (as they originally existed prior to any revisions). This folder is read only and may not be revised.
Parcel Acquisition Plans
A Parcel Acquisition Plan (PAP) is the official state document used as the basis for advanced acquisition of real estate and other property rights. It is not used to acquire property rights without prior approval of the Headquarters Real Estate Services Office and the Headquarters
R/W Plans Manager. A PAP generally includes a single parcel, although multiple parcels can be shown if appropriate. It is preferred that a PAP be used to acquire a total parcel from a willing seller. However, because they are considered an official plan, partial acquisitions can be made from these plans with an approved NEPA, except for acquisition of access rights.
A PAP is almost always used to acquire property before the completion of the Right of Way Plan.
Therefore, it is not included in the limited access hearing process. For this reason, a PAP is not used to acquire access control rights. In addition, project design is usually not complete. The risk of the region acquiring more or less real estate than needed may require additional follow up with the property owner.
A PAP is prepared to the same standards as a Right of Way Plan. The plan is certified by a professional engineer and is approved and adopted by the Headquarters R/W Plans Manager. If the highway centerline has not been established, and station/offsets cannot be used to prepare a legal description, then enough data must be shown to prepare a metes and bounds description. The description must be tied to an established boundary corner and/or General
Land Office corner, so that the property can be independently defined and located. Line work and deed calls from the description help to eliminate confusion. All parcels acquired on a PAP will be shown as WSDOT ownership on the Approved Right Of Way Plan.
The use of a PAP puts the region at risk. For this reason, use of a PAP should only be undertaken after careful consideration of all factors. The Real Estate Services and Right of Way Plans offices must be consulted before preparing a PAP. A PAP may not be used for condemnation purposes.
A PAP must be superseded by the final Right of Way Plan. The Region is responsible for submitting these superseding revision requests.
See Example 1-15.

Page 1-18
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1 100.07
Right of Way Plans
Exhibit Maps 100.07(1)
Early Total Acquisitions
An Exhibit Map is an unofficial plan used for advanced acquisition of property. It is only used for total acquisition from willing sellers. An Exhibit Map is not to be used for a partial acquisition.
These maps should be considered exhibits to assist the property owner during the negotiation and acquisition process. The plan must identify the property so that the existing legal description can be used. A new legal description will not be prepared from an Exhibit Map.
Although EEDS drafting standards should be used to prepare an Exhibit Map, minor variations may be allowed. Consultation with the HQ Right of Way Plans Section is advised. An Exhibit Map may or may not show a proposed right of way, but in no instance should limited access hachures be shown.
Use of an Exhibit Map puts the region at risk. Recommendations found in Section 100.06, Parcel
Acquisition Plans, are also appropriate for Exhibit Maps.
Exhibit Maps are not certified or adopted. Therefore, they are not superseded by the final Right of Way Plan.
See Example 1-7.

100.07(2)
Temporary Construction Easements
A variation of the Exhibit Map may be used to acquire a Temporary Construction Easement (TCE) or other purposes with prior approval by the HQ Right of Way Plans Manager. Its use is determined by the region Real Estate and Right of Way Office. If an existing Right of Way plan exists, the temporary right will be shown on the approved plan. If an approved plan does not exist, then this Exhibit Map may be utilized. The user must be aware of the associated risks involved with utilizing this section. If any of the below situations apply, an approved Right of
Way Plan shall be prepared. •
A permanent property right is to be acquired. All permanent property rights are shown on an approved Right of Way plan. •
Stationing is not to be used to define the temporary right. The temporary right area should be described by non station and offset methods. •
If a complex description is needed. •
An uncooperative owner requires the acquisition to be acquired by condemnation methods.
Temporary Construction Easements are not shown on future right of way plans. Tracking of these documents is a region responsibility. A typical TCE may last for several years depending on the type of construction and use needed by WSDOT. Another circumstance may be encountered where a TCE may be needed for just a few days. These very temporary easements do not need to be added to the approved R/W Plan. These TCE’s may be acquired on an Exhibit Map. Exhibit
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 1-19 Right of Way Plans
Division 1
Maps are not recorded with the county but used as a tool to help the property owner understand the area needed for construction purposes only. 100.07(3)
Drawing Standards
Exhibit Maps are to be prepared with English Units only on the CAD System in conformance with the adopted standards. Exhibit Maps are archived on standard 11-inch by 17-inch paper sheets and in electronic form within ProjectWise (a file management software). The Exhibit Map should include the following information, as applicable. •
Show a tie to a Government Land Office corner. •
Display the seal of a Professional Engineer preparing the Exhibit Map. •
Define the easement area with station and offset. •
Complies with R/W Plan CAD Standards. •
Provides a Legal Description (Section, Township, Range)

•
Name and address of Parcel owner as found on the title report.
Parcel Number
Total Parcel Area and area of TCE
TCE identified by outline and dimensions
Provide Assessor’s Tax Parcel Number.
SR number
Topographic features impacting the area or pertinent to the easement (Creek or river name, etc.)
Exhibit Map may include multiple parcels on a single sheet.
Design Office address and phone number.

•
File name and location of where drawing is archived or maintained.
A copy of the MicroStation file is to be placed in ProjectWise for RES tracking purposes.
A link will be sent to RES along with the submittal package for RES processing. 100.07(4)
Region Processing
The Temporary Construction Easement Exhibit Maps will not be sent to HQ Right of Way plans for processing or approval. They will be sent to the Region Real Estate Office for approval.
Although these Exhibit Maps are not recorded with the easement document, they will be maintained by the HQ Real Estate Office and accessible with the electronic document database.
See region Real Estate Services Office for an example.
Page 1-20
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Division 1 100.08
Right of Way Plans
Access Report Plan
The Access Report Plan (see Example 1-4) shows the effects of the proposed highway on the street and road system by delineating the points of public access (see the Design Manual
Chapter 530). The following items are the minimum details to be shown on the plan: •
Highway facilities with standard access control delineated. •
Public road network. •
Proposed frontage roads and county road or city street connections (individual private approaches need not be included, but the report should describe general provisions for access to private properties). •
Location and identity of subdivisions. •
Corporate limits and boundaries.

•
Rivers, streams, and major landmarks.
Pedestrian and bicycle trails or paths.
Beginning and end of plan.
Legend and scale bar.
Publicly owned utilities.
Title block.
Areas for relinquishment to county, city, or transfer to others, with Turnback Lines indicated, and labeled as such.
Structures, labeled as overcrossings or undercrossing.
Local names for interchanges shown on plan.

•
Points of public access.
Appropriate traffic movement notes on plan sheets.
Plan length on first page of Vicinity Map shown as: Total Length of Plan = __ Mile(s)
Directional arrows on all roadways and ramps.
Number of lanes indicated on all roadways.
Matching of stationing and all details, especially on all plan sheets, will be carefully checked to ensure the relationship to adjacent plans.
To prevent confusion concerning the degree of access control intended for each area of a plan, the station where transition is made from one type of control to another is clearly labeled. This applies to any such transition upon the highway proper or where such highway connects or intersects with another limited access facility, be it a state, county, or city roadway. This does not apply at intersections where the transition occurs between access-controlled facilities and
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-21

Right of Way Plans
Division 1 facilities with no access control. Modified access control adjacent to interchanges or intersections must be identified on the plan.
The title block on the plan sheet shall designate full, partial, or modified access control.
Whenever a transition occurs on a sheet, the title block shall indicate all degrees of access appearing on the sheet. 100.09
Access Hearing Plan
The region prepares an Access Hearing Plan (see Example 1 5) to be used as an exhibit at the public hearing and forwards it to the HQ Right of Way Plans Section for review. The Access
Hearing Plan shall contain the following data in addition to that required for the Access Report
Plan: 100.10 •
Topographical features such as buildings, fences, and private driveways. •
Ownerships, including parcel numbers, names, and areas (for details on assignment of property parcel identification numbers, see Section 100.04(1)(b)). Areas shown on the hearing plan shall include the total area, acquisition area, and remainder.

•
Access Approach Schedule showing all private approaches within the limits of access control.
Access control notes in conformance with Section 100.12; right of way dimensions need to be shown.
Special Right of Way Plans
Special maps and plans required for negotiation with various agencies and organizations are usually prepared by the HQ Right of Way Plans Section. When such plans are the responsibility of the region, they are transmitted to the HQ Right of Way Plans Section with the Right of
Way Plans. 100.10(1)
Court Exhibit Maps
Condemnations or taking of rights by judicial action may be accomplished through both state and federal courts. The mapping preparation varies depending upon which court is involved. (a) State Court
The actual acquisition instrument is generally the pertinent portion of the Right of Way
Plan. For court exhibits, aerial photography supplemented to depict property lines or other data is preferable. Experience has shown that juries more readily relate to this type of exhibit. If photography is not available or if specific site conditions are such that this cannot be accomplished, a special court exhibit should be prepared.
If required, the special court exhibit map is to be prepared from information shown on the Right of Way Plan. This information may be supplemented by information from the

Page 1-22
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans right of way agent’s condemnation report, the Title Report, county records, legal descriptions, and/or information obtained from personal examination of the property.
Where supplemental information indicates a difference in dimensions or area from that indicated on the Right of Way Plan, a Right of Way Plan revision should be prepared concurrent with the court exhibit map. This material will be sent to HQ Real Estate
Services, where it will be prepared as part of the exhibit and presented to the Attorney
General’s Office.
The court exhibit map is to be prepared under the supervision of the engineer who will present the map in court.
The map should include the following: •
Ties from proposed R/W centerline to existing corners. •
All buildings and improvements.

•
Accurate position of buildings and improvements that lie 100 feet or less from the proposed right of way.
Distance from improvements to proposed R/W centerline.
Location of pipelines and other construction, as requested.
Five-foot contours, drawn in brown pencil.
Bearing on ownership lines where distances are shown.
Types and points of access for limited access highways.
If possible, show the entire area to be acquired from a single ownership on a single sheet. Only the portions of an ownership covered by the Title Reports need be shown if those areas alone will be affected by condemnation and severance for right of way.
Include the limits of other adjoining parcels of the same ownership if their value may also be affected. More than one parcel involving one or more ownerships may be shown if there is no break in continuity between them and if the scale will be large enough to clearly show the features of each. Do not show fencing that is to be removed or is proposed, and do not color the map.
A Vicinity Map is required, preferably on the exhibit map sheet, showing the entire contiguous ownership of the land being condemned and pertinent topographic features.
Submit the tracing to HQ Real Estate Services with a print on which the total ownership is outlined in red, with a letter giving acreage computation for the total ownership, right of way area, and severed portions. HQ Real Estate Services will assemble all the necessary information and present the package to the Attorney General’s Office. (b) Federal Court
Maps prepared for the acquisition instrument must be consistent with federal regulations at the time of acquisition. A section of the Right of Way Plan must include
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Page 1-23 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 metes and bounds description data, and a supplemental photo exhibit map is desirable.
The specific details shall be coordinated through HQ Real Estate Services at the time of preparation. 100.10(2) Right of Way Over Lands Controlled by the Bureau of
Indian Affairs
For rights of way over lands controlled by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), the region prepares the appropriate Right of Way Plans. The Engineer’s Affidavit is signed by the Professional
Engineer who signed the Right of Way Plan. The Engineer’s Affidavit and Certification are signed by the Project Development Engineer or equivalent. Reproducibles and prints, as required, are sent by the Region Right of Way Plans Office to the Region Real Estate Services Office for further action, in accordance with the prescribed policies of WSDOT and the BIA. A copy of the
Engineer’s Affidavit and the Certification are sent, with the acquisition file, to HQ Real Estate
Services. 100.10(3)
National Forest Land
Right of Way Plans for proposed highways over national forest land and requirements for mapping of forest lands are contained in the Memorandum of Understanding, Highways Over
National Forest Lands, and amendments thereto.

100.10(4)
Washington State Ferries Facility Site Maps
Sundry Site Plans or other plans involving property for the Washington State Ferries are prepared by the HQ Right of Way Plans Section. 100.10(5)
Hardship Acquisition Maps
Region requests for hardship case consideration are submitted to the HQ Right of Way Plans
Section, accompanied by one set of half-size reproducible consisting of the following: •
Before Right of Way Plans are approved: a Vicinity Map and preliminary plans showing hardship parcels to be acquired (ownership and area of take indicated). If preliminary plans are not available, the exhibit map may be substituted. Refer to Section 100.07 for additional information (see Example 1-7). •
After Right of Way Plans have been approved, a Vicinity Map and Right of Way Plan showing hardship parcels to be acquired (ownership and area of take indicated) with a reference to the approved R/W plan.
For partial take parcels, metes and bounds descriptions of the partial takes or dimensions of take and remainder must be included in the plans.
Page 1-24

WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1 100.11
Right of Way Plans
Revisions to Approved Right of Way Plans
A minimum of 30 days prior to the start of the R/W phase of a project, the project team shall submit a request to the WSDOT HQ Right of Way Plans office for preparation of the R/W plans to be used for the project. Upon that request, the WSDOT HQ Right of Way Plans office will review and update the R/W plans as follows: 1. Convert the existing MicroStation 63 level environment into the current expanded level environment. 2. Move the base plan and the sheets into a close approximate geographic location. 3. Create single sheet per files, allowing multiple users and future GIS use. 4. Update the plan sheets to include all revisions associated with each sheet. 5. The deliverable will be stored in ProjectWise, and a link to the site will be sent to the design team requesting the service.
This process will assure that the current plan is being used and updated prior to starting project revisions. This will reduce the processing time in HQ Right of Way Plans Section and provide for more accurate scheduling.
Since this process is to be completed prior to the R/W phase of a project, all charges associated with the above-described work will be absorbed by the HQ Right of Way Plans office.
Using the converted and updated R/W plans, the Region Right of Way Plans Office submits a proposed revision package and stores it in ProjectWise per Electronic Engineering Standards
Manual (M 3028) Deliverables 8.08(2). CAD or PDF files showing the proposed revision must not be modified except as noted.
Plan revisions must be submitted and stored in ProjectWise per EEDS Deliverables 8.08(2)
For projects that include a large number of new parcels, Title Reports may be included in the transmittal package.
When revising plans that have both English units and metric units, the proposed revisions from the region shall show only English units.
Extensive changes to the existing Right of Way Plan may require submittal of a new plan in lieu of a revision.
New Right of Way Plans should be developed when the existing plans are obsolete, inaccurate, or difficult to read.
New Right of Way Plans should be considered when any of the following conditions exists: •

The scale of the existing plan is smaller than 1"=100'.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-25 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 •
The existing plan shows unreliable data (for example, assumed bearings, distances, or other important information). •
The proposed revision would require major changes to the current plan (for example, new alignment, the addition of many new parcels, or the addition of access control). •
The current plan shows “Right of Way as acquired, alignment as constructed” in the revision block. •
The existing plan was originally a county or city plan. •
Stations do not increase from left to right. •
The plan is on an old datum (for example, 1927).

When revising “Split Plans” (separate Right of Way and Limited Access Plans), the region must submit appropriate colored revisions for both plans.
Total parcel details were not shown on many of the older Right of Way Plans. When an existing
Right of Way Plan is being revised to show new parcels, include a total parcel detail. Total parcel details are very important when condemnation of the parcel is a probability. A total parcel detail is not necessary if the total parcel is especially large, such as a national forest.
Whenever a parcel has been dealt with and the transaction has been finalized, and additional right of way and/or other property rights are required, a new parcel number is assigned to the parcel involved. The old number is shown inside the area of original take. Property dots are adjusted to show the current boundary, and new areas are shown in the ownership block.
An approved Right of Way Limited Access Plan cannot be revised until completion of the appeal period following mailing of the Findings and Order. All revisions that the region develops during this time shall be held and submitted as a single package after the appeal period.
For plans that include a Wetlands Mitigation Site, the Army Corps of Engineers note, with the permit number, should be included in the plan revision. 100.11(1)
Transmittal Requirements
The following shall be placed in the appropriate ProjectWise folder and submit a revision transmittal and stored in the appropriate folder structure locations per EEDS Deliverables 8.08(2): (a) Completed Schedule of Right of Way Plan Revisions (transmittal letter). All revisions require a justification for the revision. It is very important to explain why the revision is needed. The purpose of the plan revision should be explained in detail on the transmittal letter. Reiterating what is shown on the redlined plans is not a sufficient explanation. The PS&E title should be included. (b) Marked electronic files with engineering and right of way information that includes areas revised if right of way negotiations are not complete. The actual area of the original acquisition and the area for supplemental acquisition, based on ownership at
Page 1-26
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09

Division 1
Right of Way Plans the time of the second acquisition, are included if negotiations are complete. Redlines will include parcel numbers, names, areas, and remainders. (c) Title Reports for all new parcels. Supplemental Title Reports are acceptable if the original transaction has been recently completed. A new parcel number will be needed for these parcels. (d) Copies of calculations completed to determine new parcel limits, parcel areas, and other pertinent calculations. (i.e. alg file) (e) Subdivision plats and/or other pertinent data. (f) Coincident with (a) above, when original right of way negotiations are incomplete or a revision affects condemnation proceedings, the Region Real Estate Services Manager is advised to take appropriate action pending final revision approval. (g) E-mail notification of submittals are acceptable provided the transmittal letter package is complete in ProjectWise. (h) When appropriate for Limited Access Issues, letters of approval from FHWA or the
Region ASDE is required. 100.11(2)
Headquarters Processing
The HQ Right of Way Plans Section will conduct a final review of the plan revisions and coordinate the review with other offices and the FHWA, as required.
The Region will revise the current existing and approved R/W plan(s) submitted for revision subsequent to HQ R/W Plans office review, verification and comment prior to approval by the
HQ Right of Way Plans Manager.
Following approval, the plan(s) will be placed into the electronic document management system for access by the regions, HQ Real Estate Services, and other plan users. 100.12
Access Control Notes 100.12(1)
Instructions

Standard access control notes cover all necessary descriptions to be shown in the plans for the granting of approaches. An access approach note plus necessary supplementary notes will be used to identify all like approaches listed.
The access approach schedule on the Right of Way Plan shall list the specific details for each approach. Under the Centerline of Approach Station column, enter the exact station or the stations between whose limits the approach will be granted, the side of centerline (right, left, or both), and any supplementary information required. Under the Type column, indicate the letter and/or applicable supplementary note numbers.
The supplementary notes are used in conjunction with the access approach notes to which they apply. Each supplementary note shall always be listed by the number assigned to it. In this
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-27 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 manner, an access approach note letter with a supplementary note number will always indicate the same type of approach throughout all Right of Way Plans.
Type A through Type F approaches are defined in WAC 468 58 080, and are listed in the Access
Approach Notes section below.
Supplemental Note No. 8, Railway Access, will be used to prohibit traffic movement between the railway right of way and the traveled highway lanes.
Supplemental Note No. 21, Utility Within Right of Way Maintained From Outside Right of Way, refers to a utility within the right of way by franchise or permit where all access is to be from the adjacent streets, roads, or property. The supplementary note number only will be listed under the Type column of the access approach schedule.
If it is necessary to add a special stipulation to an approach note, an asterisk may be indicated after the letter and/or number in the Type column of the access approach schedule. The special stipulation indicated by the asterisk shall be explained under the Access Notes column in the same manner as a footnote.

100.12(2)
Access Approach Notes (a) Type A Approach Note
Type A approach is an off and on approach in a legal manner, not to exceed 30 feet in width, for the sole purpose of serving a single-family residence. It may be reserved by an abutting owner for specified use at a point satisfactory to the state at or between designated highway stations. (This note may be supplemented by a note stating the number of users and/or special use.) (b) Type B Approach Note
Type B approach is an off and on approach in a legal manner, not to exceed 50 feet in width, for use necessary to the normal operation of a farm, but not for retail marketing.
It may be reserved by an abutting owner for specified use at a point satisfactory to the state at or between designated highway stations. (This note may be supplemented by a note stating the number of users.) (c) Type C Approach Note
Type C approach is an off and on approach in a legal manner, for special purpose and width to be agreed upon. It may be specified at a point satisfactory to the state at or between designated highway stations. (Always supplement by notes stating number of users, special use, and width.) (d) Type D Approach Note
Type D approach is an off and on approach in a legal manner not to exceed 50 feet in width for use necessary to the normal operation of a commercial establishment. It may
Page 1-28
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans

be specified at a point satisfactory to the state at or between designated highway stations. (e) Type E Approach Note
Type E approach is a separated off and on approach in a legal manner, with each opening not exceeding 30 feet in width, for use necessary to the normal operation of a commercial establishment. It may be specified at a point satisfactory to the state at or between designated highway stations. (This note is no longer used but is still shown on some existing deeds.) (f) Type F Approach Note
Type F approach is an off and on approach in a legal manner, not to exceed 30 feet in width, for the sole purpose of serving a wireless communication site. It may be specified at a point satisfactory to the state at or between designated highway stations. 100.12(3)
Supplementary Notes (a) Offset Access Note – No. 1
This approach is to be used to travel on right of way and enter property as specified. (In the access approach schedule, list the station of approach on roadway and the station where property is to be entered; for example, 146+00 Rt. to leave R/W 148+50
Rt.) (b) Joint Usage Note – No. 2
This approach is to be used to serve more than one owner and/or utility, for only those ownerships listed on the access approach schedule. (Use this note for each approach serving more than one owner and/or utility.) (c) Modified Access Control Note – No. 3
No longer used. (d) Special Farm Equipment Note – No. 4
This approach may be increased in width, not to exceed 80 feet, for use by special farm equipment. During the crossing of the highway with farm equipment requiring an approach exceeding 50 feet in width, traffic on the highway shall be protected by flaggers provided by the owner at the owner’s expense. (e) Utilities Note – No. 5
This approach is to be used for the operation, maintenance, and repair of the utility specified. The approach shall not exceed 50 feet in width. (In the access approach schedule, state the station limits on the roadway, the type of utility and, if required, the gating restriction.)

WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-29 Right of Way Plans
Division 1 (f) Grain Hauling Note – No. 6
This approach is for limited use in hauling grain during the harvest season. The approach shall not exceed 50 feet in width. (In the access approach schedule, state the station limits on the roadway and, if required, the gating restriction.) (g) Tree Farm Note – No. 7
This approach is to be used for the operation of a tree farm or tree farms, including the removal of raw forest products therefrom, but may not be used for retail marketing. The approach shall not exceed 50 feet in width. (h) Railway Access Note – No. 8
No access is permitted between the railway right of way and the traveled highway lanes. (In the access approach schedule, state the station on the roadway and name of railway.) (i) Gate Restriction Note – No. 9
This approach shall be gated and locked when not in use. (j) Restricted Clearance Note – No. 10
Only as restricted clearance permits. (k) Pedestrian and Bicycle Trails Note – No. 11
Pedestrian and bicycle traffic will be permitted use of the trail designated on the ____________(Rt. or Lt.) between Sta. ____________ and Sta. _____________.
Access to the trail will be permitted only at:
Sta. ________________ (Rt. or Lt.) (This note may be supplemented by a note stipulating any restrictions or special privilege of direct access to the trail. The note should appear on each plan sheet on which the trail is shown. Station limits of the trail should not extend beyond the individual sheet limits. Access breaks for the trail are noted only on the specific sheet where the break occurs.) (l) Trail Access Note – No. 12
Abutting property owners may be afforded the privilege of direct access to the trail under permits issued by WSDOT. (m) Utility Within Right of Way Maintained From Outside Right of Way Note – No. 21
The privilege of access to areas within the right of way is permitted from outside the right of way to the user designated, solely for use authorized by and subject to the conditions of the franchise, permit, or agreement specified. No access will be allowed to the traveled highway lanes or ramps.

Page 1-30
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans (In the access approach schedule, state the name of utility, the type of utility, the station of entry, and the franchise or permit number.) (n) Dominant/Servient Access Note – No. 22
This approach use is for the benefitted parcel per the easement of record. This use is only allowed as long as the easement remains in effect. This approach is to be used to serve both the dominant and servient estate. (o) Noise Wall Access Note – No. 23
This approach is to be used by WSDOT for the maintenance and repair of the noise wall.
The approach shall be through noise wall doors located at Stations XXX+XX (must be accompanied by Note No. 9). (p) WSDOT/Local Agency Maintenance Access Note – No. 24 __________________ will be permitted access at Sta. _________ (Rt. or Lt.) for the maintenance of _________________________ (consider including Note No. 9). (q) Pedestrian Sidewalk Access Note – No. 25
Pedestrians allowed where provided for. (r) Traffic Movement Note – No. 26
Traffic movement will be permitted over/under the highway structures at ___________ (state the name of the road or the facility and the station limits on the roadway). 100.13
Archiving R/W Plans 100.13(1)
Existing Plans

The official copy of all Right of Way (R/W) plans are stored electronically in file management software called ”ELECTRONIC CONTENT MANAGEMENT”. The software package utilizes a database management tool and search engine of all R/W, Sundry Site Plans, Exhibit and Parcel
Acquisition Plans prepared for acquiring property rights. All acquisition plan sheets have been scanned (as a TIFF image) or printed to a PDF image.
All revised R/W plan sheets are updated into the database on a weekly basis. This allows the most current existing and approved R/W plan sheet to be available at any given time. 100.13(2)
Superseded R/W Plans
As road alignments are modified through improvement programs, the existing R/W plan may be superseded by a new drawing. The superseded plan is still considered a valid plan as it provides the history that is sometimes needed when questions arise as to how specific roadway sections were acquired. These plans are kept on file, in electronic document management, under the
Superseded section.
These plans may not be available to all individuals. If you need access to the superseded plans,
Contact the State Survey Manager for approval.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-31

Right of Way Plans 100.13(3)
Division 1
Plan History
R/W plans evolve when roadways are improved, easements added or deleted, alignments changed within the established footprint, additional improvements proposed, etc. These minor revisions can sometimes be lost if the plan is revised multiple times. A new process has emerged allowing WSDOT HQ R/W Plans office to capture a plan sheet at any given time if it has been software package called ProjectWise.
This product acts like a file cabinet storing information as the plan currently exists plus what is to be revised. As time goes on, this plan information may become instrumental in a court case or discussions with property owners over center line alignments, Right of Way widths, highway access schedules, and other property rights related to a specific timeframe.
These intermediate plan sheets will be able to answer many of these questions before the area becomes cluttered with after the fact revisions. These intermediate plan sheets may be looked up using the SR number/calendar folder/ year sheet was revised/ date sheet was revised/sheet name. A historical record of what was added or removed from each sheet is recorded for anyone with access to ProjectWise.
To find a specific plan sheet that may be archived see below: 100.14
Limited Access plan only
Prior to
July 1, 2010

Limited Access and
R/W Plan sheets present
Sec. of State office and
Records Imaging
Copy of previous plan sheet placed with
Calendar package
Contact Records
Imaging
Contact R/W Plans office to obtain archived package
Copy of previous plan sheet is kept in
ProjectWise

Contact R/W Plans office or HQ Access and Hearings office
Digital Signatures 100.14(1)
New Plan Sheets
WSDOT has transitioned from signing new R/W Plans, (all types) from using the traditional method of pen and ink with a hand signature of all the approvers, replacing it with digital signatures of all approvers. This allows the transferring of multiple copies by email very quickly without taking time to print multiple sheet copies and then mailing them to expectant recipients.
This process is administered by the Digital Signature administrator and the R/W Plans Office. All new and revised R/W Plans requiring an approval signature(s), will be developed and saved in a
PDF format. A link to the ProjectWise folder with the PDF file will be sent by email to the signer(s) where the signer(s) will place their digital signature, following the process set up by the
R/W Plans Office, and then emailed back to the R/W Plans Office. The State R/W Plans Manager will place their digital signature providing the seal of approval of the new set of plans. The plans
Page 1-32
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09 Division 1
Right of Way Plans

are now ready to be officially approved and adopted by WSDOT for acquisition and disposal of property rights.
A digitally signed plan sheet may not be revised without invalidating the signatures. The usual sign that the plan has been modified is a red “X” across the title block.
A R/W plan sheet which has been digitally signed and in need of being revised is copied, within
ProjectWise, to its new location. This action will remove all digital signatures. The process is to have the State R/W Plans Manager resign the approval of the plan sheet. The other signers, will have a note placed by their seals stating that they digitally signed this sheet on a specific date.
WSDOT Plans Preparation Manual M 22-31.09
Page 1-33 Right of Way Plans
Page 1-34
Division 1 T.14N. R.2W. W.M.
SEE 100.03(7) Bullet 13 i
I•

---- -----
I
GOV'T LOT 7
SEC. 18 -----,-----~
GOV'T LOT s I
SEC. 18
GOV'T LOT 8
GOV'T LOT 4
GOV'T LOT 1 ( GOV'T ; LOT 3 I '. \SEC. 18 1
GOV'T LOT 6

.· _
I
I• •
GOV'T LOT S
SEC. 7
GOV'T LOT 11 4-08068 .............. c 4-08087 ) \ µov'T LOT 2
SEC. 18 .. ... I > "J er: 4-08085 -r ----I
SEE 100.02
TO OLYMPIA,., '\1 -·-·-·-·-'"·-·---'\14L en .... ' I"• .. '· . ...... • ················· \ \ \ 1
BEGINNING OF PLAN
STA. 1739+00
MP 80.65

• 4-08084 00 4-08088
GOV'T LOT 10
SEC. 7
NW 14 SW 14
SEC. 17
GOV'T LOT 9
SEE 100.03(7) Last Bullet
LIMIT OF PLAN
SR 507 STA. M 23+68.79 A.P.
SR 507 MP 0.15

VICINITY MAP AND TOTAL PARCEL DETAILS
TOTAL LENGTH OF PLAN = 3.05 MILES
EXAMPLE 1-1
SHEET 17
EXHIBIT A ,,.­
SEE 100.03(7) Bullet 23 -----­ --- --­ ---jjUl.Q_ __ -< ,,.J. ---­ -­ ----­ 1810 - - -
SHEET 8
SR 5 ------
MELLEN ST. TO
BLAKESLEE JUNCTION

SHEET 9
LEWIS COUNTY
SHEET 7 '\1E>Q:::-- ...... -
SHEET 5
VICINITY MAP AND TOTAL PARCEL DETAILS
MP 80.65 TO MP 82.37
STATION L 1739+00 TO STATION L 1829+00
SHEET 18
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
SHEET 4

SHEET 3
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
SHEET LAYOUT DIAGRAM
NOT TO SCALE
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR"
LEGEND c-
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS )
PROJECT ENGINEER

.....................
PROPERTY LINES
DATE PE SIGNED 0 500
SCALE IN FEET
APPROVED AND ADOPTED 1000
Reference
Approval
By
Appr.
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET

1
OF 19
SHEETS
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER CURVE DATA
Pl STATION 157+66.55 167+19.71
CR3 2+40.00
CR3 8+13.20
DELTA 67°18'42" RT 2°18'42" LT 76°35'17" LT 97°23'43" RT
RADIUS 1200' 10,000' 250' 250'
TANGENT 798.76' 201.76' 197.40' 284.55'

LENGTH 1409.77' 403.46' 334.18' 424.97'
T.10N. R.8W. W.M. '' '' 30' ' r---- ---- --- ' \ '' '' '' '' \ \ • ''• • '•• ' '• ''• • '• '
I ----------- - --11,
I '' '' ' '' ''
CR3 9+53.62 P.T. '' '' '•• \
C~'
I •• ''• • '•• • '' '• '• '•• •• •• 50' '' ' ' •• 1:' ·' : \ ( 4-05388 ) . \' / / / ••' !. \ '' '' • \\~ . / ® 8 ~10
CR3 5+28.65 P.C.
CR3 _/
TURNBACK LINE

' 157+66.55 P.I. ;/ '' '' '' ''• '' '• '' '' ,, . 151 +75.87
I / , _, _/~/ <J:; ..... ;(" ~0 ( 4-05390 ) <:.,~ / ....'!"9'. -········ - .-· , ,/-' -· /~~C) ·,. / '' ' . _.-. -_ , /,,­
Oo -~ v,, _,__ , ~, / ,/ ;/ zi{ , ,, '' , , '\' -,, ' ,, ~,,' '
G) ,'r),,<o, ,Y , ', ~d', ' o"-C) ; 'I:,°>; ' 0 ,, ' ' ,, ' ' ', ; ' '\
GRADE CROSSING ~ 160+86.87 P.O.C.= ~
RR 1253+45.51 P.O.T. , .-­ ', ":,'1,C) , ', ', ' ' 164+93.38 (689.23' LT) , / @ 10
AREA 161+60.08 100'LT. = ~
RR 1252+31.04 (50'LT.) ~ _ // / ''o', Z9, ',~-'i, _-~ / / ~o>, ' ,
MITIGATION ( 4-05392) 50' ACCESS
EASEMENT

~--~ ' ' , "'7··, ;/ ,,~, ' ;/
WETLANDS MITIGATION AREA NOT TO BE
SOLD AND SHALL BE PRESERVED FROM
DEVELOPMENT IN PERPETUITY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH DEPARTMENT OF THE
ARMY PERMIT NO. 93-4-00148 1,~ ":, ' / / //._/' 00~ / / / ' / / , / ,' ,-/_~ / .- ; / . / ~«), / .- -_-_ ,, ,// 0«), / ;/ '' ·--­ 10'<'­ / / ,­ -~--. ;,;,;;-.;;:. ;,;,:;;:;.;. ;;;.· ;;_·;;,;.···· ····;.;;.;:;;; ;;;.;,;;;;;.; ·::;,:.· ;,;,;;,;-,;,;;,;;;.;.;-;.;;,.:;;;;;;;;,;;,; ;;;;;;;;,;;,;;;;.;' ~-.:,;,;,;;~;.;;;;,;;~·· . ;,;;;,,' ;;;;;~·.;;,;,;:;;;;;;;;,;;·~;;;,;;·~;;,;,; ;;,;,;.:······· 149+67.59 P.C. 0~ ~ / ,/ 20' TEMPORARY
CONSTRUCTION '~ #, tI i
I /'
Oo 7 -~ ,,# ;,)~0"'// ,#'
I

FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO COUNTY
G) ,;/r<-~«)/~~ // ;t~' 160+64.06 100'LT. =
RR 1252+57.20 ( 50' RT.) / . )! /~p ;r~ ~o~
N 49°10'17" E * * * * / / / <l'-' / / ; / t::,'<',t-'?- / - -_- /4/ ,, z-·, f ( 4-05391 ) "'qQ __, / //~, / ,, / . . ;r' / ,' o"-~~ ;r-~ / / //, ,?~ 'I:,°> WETLANDS 1<:. . . . '1 ,., / ,/ i .'\ / -~/
CR3 9+75 • '•• •• ;/ '' '• '' '' '' '' '• ''• '' '' '
CR3 8+13.20 P I. '•
N 48°13'26" E 15' . // . 15' ', ;/~ ,? )(, / / ;/,,;/ ;/,, /'( / / ,, / ,,/
CR3 10+75 15' ' ', ~
FOR RIGHT OF WAY EASTERLY.SEE SR 4,DEEP
RIVER TO JOHNSON'S LANDING, SHEET 3 OF 12
SHEETS, DATED JUNE 22, 1943

Cb
Vo nv"' :S' ..
Go c..,~v· .L (j)
THIS PLAN SUPERSEDES SHEETS 1 AND 2
OF 12 SHEETS OF SR 4, DEEP RIVER TO
JOHNSON'S LANDING, DATED JUNE 22, 1943. 141+60± ( 4-05387
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

••••••••··:;:;-.•••• 163+77.36 P.T. 20' SLOPE
EASEMENT 165+17.94 P.C.
END OF PLAN
STA. 170+00 P.O.T. BK.=
STA. 47+19.65 P.O.T. AHD.
MP 11.38
G)
SEE 100.03(3)(a) ®
SEE 100.03(3)(b)
O 0

166+20 P.O.C. 74.67' RT. =
RR 2245+03.02 (30' RT.)
I '0 'I 0
I 167+19.71 P.I. ' '
G) SEE 100.03(3)(c) @ SEE 100.03(6) . ( \
SR 4 \ ' '
LONGITUDINAL
EASEMENT )
FLOOD
RIVER

® SEE 100.03(7) ® SEE 100.04(1)(b) ' '
EBB
DEEP RIVER BRIDGE VICINITY 169+00 P.O.C. 70.42' RT. =
RR 2242+21 (30' RT.) ...J 0.. :a: ~ :a: 0.. ~ :,; M ~~o a, ® SEE 100.04 ® SEE 100.11
RIGHT OF WAY PLAN
MP 10.43 TO MP 11.38
STATION 141+00 TO STATION 170+00 169+21.42 P.T.
Ll. ACCESS EASEMENT
Q INCLUDES 2.41 AC. OF WETLANDS MITIGATION AREA @ SEE 100.03(3)(h) ® * 1------.----------------,,---------.-------r-------.--------,-------, 4-05393
B.N.S.F.

UNDETER
00.39 AC. 00.13AC. 4-05392
MARTIN, N.M., ET AL.
27.49 AC.
2.69 AC. *
SLOPE EASEMENT *
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
S 1°31'45" E BK.= s 2°28'00" E AHO.

DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR"
CROSSING EASEMENT - INCLUDES 0.23 AC. OF EXISTING
CROSSING EASEMENT LONGITUDINAL EASEMENT r-----r---------------ir-----,--------r-------r-------r-,"171"'iir--r----------------------------·-------------------------------------------------.. *
24.80 AC.
Ll. 0.71 AC.
LEGEND '? :9
0.16 AC. ~~ 1---4--0-5-39-1--+-S-K-E-~-S.-D-.R-_-(J_O_N-ES-.-R-.S-.)-----+------+------+------+------l-*-*-0-.0-9_A_C __----1
24.08 AC.
0.48 AC.
23.60 AC.
23.50 AC.
6.27 AC.
17.23 AC. 4-05390
WEGE, G.W. 1---4--0-5-38-9----+--WE-Y_E_R_H_A_E_U_SE_R_C_O_M_P_A_NY-------11--------+-------+-------+---------+----------<
UNDETER
0.23 AC.
UNDETER. .,_ 4-05388
SEE SHEET 2 ~~------1----------------11--------+------+------+------+---------< ~ " 4-05387
SEE SHEET 2 09 ~ ml------1----------------11--------+-------+-----~--------+----------< ..,- c
PARCEL NO.
NAME
TOTAL AREA
RNv
LT REMAINDER RT
EASM'T ~1-T-OT_A_L_A_R_E_A---+--IS-F-RO_M_A_S_S_E_S_S_O_R'-S--------+---O-W--N-E-R~-S-H_I_P_S_~_ _ _A_L_L_A_R_E-AS_A_R_E-SH_O_WN-~I-N_S_Q_U_A_R_E-----1

!"1 0
WAHKIAKUM COUNTY
END LONGITUDINAL EASEMENT 169+00 P.O.C. (50.42' RT.)=
RR 2242+21.44 (50' RT.) (j) SEE 100.03(10) w
EXAMPLE 1-2
RECORDS UNLESS OTHER~SE NOTED.
FEET UNLESS OTHER~SE NOTED. (
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS )
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK

.....................
PROPERTY LINES
PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE PE SIGNED 0 50
SCALE IN FEET 100
Letter 7--6-04
Letter6-3-04
Reference 7-16-04 6-11-04
A roval
Added Wetlands Mil. Area and Access Easement on Lt. Vic. Sta. 164+00; Rev. Areas Parcel 4-05392
Rev. RNv on Lt. Sta. 153+00 to 155+50; Rev. Areas Parcel4-05390
Revision Descri tion

FLS
B
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET 3
OF 3
SHEETS
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER i/1
T.27N. R.43E. W.M. 1:1:1 / 1 l '
SEE 100.03(4)

I -----rt4~k-___ i .i ~!
SW 1/4 NE 1/4 c .1/:.·1 :!~ll ./ ' -a.~/ I: •:: /: 1 i? 1 .•/.·.· .... w >- l ~j ~ z r, " •• , f I 1.
RR 287+56.78 (50'LT.) •:: / j: /
I
NW 2
RR 287+5678(50'RT) / ./• 31o·;:1o01Y . . .:
N 03 • 13.00
I/ ,/ : ( -+---, ( 6-02823 ) ( uw . oo '" ,._ 11 1 1"'
I I •I ., ~ "'I:,'.',,.,,,, ' ow>-'~"1~1.S) 50 \\ ' 11
II

11 1 ; l, _ _ _ _ _,,______ : , .
Ii
C )
FR3 61+96± ( 70 ' LT.) l
HO. 6-02827
I i .• \ uA \ ~ i,a :/ ,,,,.,.\1../1 !i :3. / "' '""'" uA /./1\1 ; ,","'- " ' . 1 1 11 / ~ g R c~~~~UISHMENT
FR 3 LINE
CUL-DE-SAC
I 6,0 ~ :; :1----;--,, c21;~;5·;;i 1%!+0~0 ;gTT.(~~~;l BK . ~~ 1:1 :1 i1~:.g;-~145'LT.) j _Y -,------ 3 2 4 -.
I

:: - , __ /
II -f J'""------_:.:..:..:. =-:.:..:..:. =-:.:..:..:.:.:.:..:..:.: :..·..:-=:..:..:_..:.:. _,..: _:. =--..: _:.=--..: _:.:....:-==-=--~..:.::.=--..:..:.:. _..:..:.:.:.:..:..:.:.:....:..:.:.:.:..:..:.:..:.-..:..:.;:.F--= =-=:_..:._:. _,..:-=:.. ·, -=:..
I' / / \., 1-60------N 03°13'00" W---------------- - 1
FR3 6;+96+ . :r :!I
SR 2-------' 111 11
II \,_ ----- - 'LL'•I I p ' ' •-------------------------~~-----~~-~--~---~~------------7-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------, ~ : / • I .'(\ ', 11 11' 1,-'I 6-02825 ) / :: 1 \\
I\ (
II : ' : I
II 1:...
I/

6-02829 )
LL 171+61.26 - 00 ,(J) 1 ~ ~~J,-.:. Irr:~~~~~~~~~~~.:.:.=-:.:..:.:.=-::..:. =-:.:-=.:. =-:.:..: ~~~..:.:. =-:.:..::..:.: :..:.:. =-:.::;:~.:..:_.:.:.:..: _:.:... _.:. =-~ s:...:..:.:_,:...:. =-- ~ =-:.:..:..:.=· ~~..:.=- :..:..:. =-:.:..:..:.=-:.:..:-=:..:..:_..:. _- - - - - - 1;_ 11 c fi~ f! 2 1/
FR3 54+26.71 c105'LT.) a ,5l.,
I
Ii 1 '° 'lO~ IiI.· ~,~ ____r- ,\'"
SEE 100.03(7)
HO.
I~ r!I
I/ i 6-02824 )
GRADE INTERSECTION

,o. :,J•cr( .·'f I 1
Qi?<('. ':~ ,""' ­ !I ' • -
X 1/4 NE 1/4 ·I
I l/111 ~ :
I ,,,, 1 1's,1 0 --=(---------------------------~-----' 1 \, 155 e-------------------------~;---~---,--.-.c,1-··t t:; \' ,~======1:i ,~ // 6-02822 ) 1-3 ----------­
I/:,~,#::.:-: \\, ~[Q)[Q)al]a@lM 6-02821 ) i,,0,~!• ' 1
SEC. 15 ~R:: E:.:~~:~s~n- i// 2 j _:...::. _,_:.::.._:..:.::...:. :.:_:...:.=-:.::...:. =-:.:..:::.~~ ·,·-- 3
EXAMPLE /11•0,_J;
I :
0 SEE 100.0 3(7)

FOR SURVEY INFORMATION SEE RECORD OF SURVEY
SR 2, CHATTAROY SOUTH, RECORDED MAY 25, 2004
AFN 20040525900144
I ,· erci I/! ",,
I / // !/iii // ~ : : : ( 11 ,.' /f ...J ( 6-02819 ) !/
LL 148tt4.S3 <115'LTl•
I
THE DISTANCES SHOWN ARE GROUND DISTANCES.
I ; - ,
I ) ,

.·/ zw' : :: - ' Ii l l . . ii l I! :/
CROSSING
EASEMENT 4 [K]~[IBffial~[i¥i]~a~[IB~ .!/: ~,' i I •/: gJ- I : I ' ~ 5 '/' t l •· ,! ~ j .11·.· 1 1-~ I : I
SEE 100.03(4)
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

-----p,, ~------------------- . i1 ·:· ,
I ! fi a 1' '"U,~ .·,//: z~fl I ~ 1 ·•S :::
RAILWAY ACCESS NOTE
NO ACCESS IS PERMITTED BETWEEN
THE RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY AND
THE TRAVELED HIGHWAY LANES.
I '/ . •
T 6-02815 ) '
I 1J!
SEC.15

I
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES ARE
DETERMINTED FROM WASHINGTON
COORDINATE SYSTEM NORTH ZONE (NAD 83/91). ,­ - - ' 2
U"l
I\ 165 -------------LL LINE _______________)_1-1-0 ... ------------------)· 1 . •
F-... ;::: 1 ~~------ ----~
LL ' - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -~ -
LINE - ­
LR LINE

,/ "- ' . - ""---l---'.:...:=-=--..:.::.-=-=-_:_:. ­
N 03°13'00" W ~ i-----------­ _____;.-i;.•·.p:.. ~=,;-;2!-==-=:;...,,.;:;:·~""T"L-F­ -=+F-,...=-=:;...::i..,-~:-- - - - - - - T f- - - ......
L
IV:! : '.i /
OVERCROSSING /
LL 148+87.46 =
RR 286+42.10
OVERCROSSING
LL 148+27.53 (190' RT.)=
RR 284+51.71 (50' LT.)

I~., ;,,;./1.. ,,,,,,..i,,,,,,.,,'*,,,.,.,,,.,,.,,,.,,.,,,,,,.,,,,,,,,,,, i, 'r,.'---------------~---------// .. .,.,,,,,. .,,, ... .,, .. _.. ,, ............................... ,,,.,,,,.,,,,,,,,,,,,,.1,,,,.1,,,,,,,,,,.,,.,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,. .. ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, .. ,,,,,,,,, .............. ., ........................ ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
I :I jV • .,I/
Ii
I .•
I j ;I .'
II
I l
I: r: r
I
GRADE INTERSECTION /
LL 149+27.36 (190' RT.)=

( 6-02820 )
RR 284•51.71 (SIT RT.)
I• ( 6-02818 ) · ·
ACCESS NOTES:
TYPE B APPROACH IS AN OFF AND ON
APPROACH IN LEGAL MANNER, NOT TO
EXCEED 50 FEET IN WIDTH, FOR USE
NECESSARY TO THE NORMAL OPERATION
OF A FARM, BUT NOT FOR RETAIL MARKETING.
IT MAY BE RESERVED BY ABUTIING
OWNER FOR SPECIFIED USE AT A POINT
SATISFACTORY TO THE STATE AT OR
BETWEEN DESIGNATED HIGHWAY STATIONS.

LEGEND
TYPE C APPROACH IS AN OFF AND ON
APPROACH IN LEGAL MANNER, FOR
SPECIAL PURPOSE AND WIDTH TO BE
AGREED UPON. IT MAY BE SPECIFIED
AT A POINT SATISFACTORY TO THE
STATE AT OR BETWEEN DESIGNATED
HIGHWAY STATIONS. /////////
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS c.
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS

) .....................
PROPERTY LINES 0 100
SCALE IN FEET
GLIDDEN, RICHARD
AARON.HANK * STORMWATER TREATMENT AREA 200 * 0.11 AC. * 1.77 AC. = t;'O' f ~ 163+24.61 :~
STORMWATER TREATMENT AREA . 1 (NON ACCESS MANAGED HIGHWAYS
WITHIN CITY LIMITS) ~•;••••;•••••••;.oaiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii ~I ~I
TO COUNTY
I ~ .· I' I •130'•30'
N 13+84 UA

~, 1 1 , 1I"I · . !' , ' ?­
NO. 5. THIS APPROACH IS TO BE USED
FOR THE OPERATION, MAINTENANCE,
AND REPAIR OF THE UTILITY SPECIFIED.
THE APPROACH SHALL NOT EXCEED
50 FEET IN WIDTH.
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE TRAFFIC WILL BE
PERMITIED ACCESS AND USE OF THE TRAIL
DESIGNATED ON THE RT. BETWEEN STA LL 102+40± AND LL 162+75±. ACCESS TO THE
TRAIL WILL BE PERMITTED ONLY AT:
STA LL 102+40+ RT.
STA LL 162+75+ RT.

j
U1
7.01 AC.
5.35 AC. ...Ji, .,:.
WA. WATER POWER
LR 149+80 RT.
C-2-5 (TRANSMISSION LINE) ~t------+---------------1------+-------+-------+-------+-------t----------------------+----------1 ~ 6-02829
UR BLAND
10.60 AC.
0.75 AC.
9.85 AC. ~ 6-02828
JONES, STEVE ET AL.
8.64 AC.
1.52 AC.
7.12 AC. ~ 6-02827
SMITH, RONALD
3.08 AC.
0.79 AC.
2.29 AC.
LR 170+00 TO LR 172+00 RT.
B
8.64 AC.
1.52 AC.
7.12 AC. ~ 6-02826
AARON, HANK 6-02825
HERMSMEIER (WILLIAMS), JUDY
3.79 AC.
0.59 AC.
3.20 AC. ~ 6-02824
SUNDERMAN, ADAM (KING)
3.79 AC.
0.73 AC.
306 AC. ~ 6-02823
MANTLE, MICKEY
3.44 AC.
0.49 AC.
2.95 AC. ~ !!, ~ ,., 6-02822
PAIGE, SATCHEL
3.56 AC.
0.49 AC.
3.07 AC. ~~
3.67 AC.
0.49 AC.
3.18 AC. "' ~ 6-02821
COBB, TY ~~ t - - 6 - - - 0 2 - 8 - 2 0 - - + - R - U _ T _ H ~ , B - A _ B _ E - - - - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - + - - - - - - + - - - - - - 1 - - 1 - 3 . - 6 9 _ A _ C - . - + - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - ­
16.62 AC.
2.93 AC. ~o 3.79
AC. 0.49 o~ t--6_-_02_8_19_--+_E_.P_._F_E_R_RY_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ___,_ _ _ _ _ _+ - - -AC. - - - - +3.30 - -AC. -----+-------+-------t----------------------+--------• ~ ,: 6-02818
STEVENS, HIRAM
3.56 AC.
LR 149+80 RT.
B-2
4.32 AC.
0.76 AC. ,.1 t - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - + - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - t - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - ­ (;l 0.70 AC. a. 6-02817
HAPPY VALLEY RAILROAD
UNDETERMINED

LL 167+10 (325' RT.)
SW 1/4 SE 1/4
THIS PLAN SUPERSEDES OF SR 2, DEEP CREEK
VICINITY TO BEER CREEK BRIDGE, SHEETS 4 AND 5
OF 6 SHEETS, APPROVED JUNE 2, 1965, AND SHEET 2
OF 3 SHEETS OF SR 2, DEEP CREEK VICINITY TO
BEER CREEK BRIDGE PLAN SHOWING ACCESS, SHEET
2 OF 3 SHEETS, APPROVED APRIL 2, 1965. ;;
LIMITED ACCESS ESTABLISHED BY THE DIRECTOR
OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENGINEERING PROGRAMS
FINDINGS AND ORDER ADOPTED AUGUST 19, 2004

IE
LIMITED ACCESS FEATURES TENTATIVELY APPROVED
BY THE RIGHT OF WAY PLANS MANAGER JUNE 3, 2004 ,. 'co •• •• ....... ~-······· ',::>::cc : : ' ~;11 ~' ~ ' :~:N::,:Q~~:HMENT
NO. 2. THIS APPROACH IS TO BE USED
TO SERVE MORE THAN ONE OWNER
AND/OR UTILITY, FOR ONLY THOSE
OWNERSHIPS LISTED ON THE ACCESS
APPROACH SCHEDULE. ,.,,, .,,, i::.. • 3 ;~ 1'1 (;l INCLUDES 0.41 AC. EXISTING CROSSING EASEMENT
7.12 AC.
7.12 AC.

uu;;, ,,,,, •
LL 162+64.46/ l : JJ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
II .... ,,, .......... ,, ........ ., .............. "---~/r____"'"'""' ----------------------------- .............................................:.:.::,-·-:cc......c......cc., c ..ccJ>-~cc.."1.{,,..4 . . 4. . .,. .~ . '4 ........ ~'A"'~ /1\ "'"'"'"'"'"'"'
LL 163+06.82 P.O.T.=
N 10•00 p 0. T. ~ ( 6-02826 ) 1/
CROSSING
EASEMENT 6-04234 6-04233
TO NEWPORT
SEC. 10 c .. i i i .... / , ... • • •• •• ( 6-02828 z ..J
LL 173+18 (325' RT.) 6-04233 )

c 6-04234 )
EXHIBIT A
SR 2
DEER CREEK ROAD
TO CHATTAROY
SPOKANE COUNTY ...i,, c:,
RIGHT OF WAY AND LIMITED ACCESS PLAN
PARTIAL CONTROL
MP 299.69 TO
MP 300.26
STATION LL 145+00 TO
STATION LN 175+00

...Ji, §, u
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON t------+---------------1------+-------+-------+-------+-------t----------------------+---------
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS t-----+---'-------------1------+------+-------+-------+-------l----------------------1-------•
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR" ~-----~-----+---------------------+------~-----~---~-----------------------------------------~-- :ct-----+---------------1------+------+-------+-------+-------l----------------------1-------• 4 _____4 ______ ~t~~6~-~02~8~16~ o $ 6-02815 4 ~S~E=E~SH~E~E~T~2--------+----SEE SHEET 2
LR 149+80 RT.
B-2
Letter 9-16-04 9-24-04
Rev. UA Added Stormwater Treatment Area on Rt Sta. LL 167+10 LL 173+18; Added Parcels 6-04233 & 6-04234
FLS ~mt------+---------------1------+-------+------~------+-------t----------------------+--------+------+-----+------------------------------------------+--~
PARCEL NO.
NAME
TOTAL AREA
RNv
LT. REMAINDER RT.
EASM'T
CENTERLINE OF APPROACH STATION
TYPE t-----~-------------------+------~-----------~-------t----------------------~--------1
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE o RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.

st c - a, ~3
OWNERSHIPS
ACCESS APPROACH SCHEDULE
COMM. F&O 8- 19-o4
Reference 8-20-04
Annroval
Added Commission Findings and Order
FLS
Revision Description
Bv

PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE PE SIGNED
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET 3
OF 6
SHEETS
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER T.13N. R.19W. W.M.
SECTION CORNER (CALC.) ~ 0 'i' g ..., I­0: 0 z 0 z 0 ..., 11A LINE " "::l ~ 0:
S 89°14'30" E BK.=
S 89'17'57" E AHD.

~ ~
FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO CITY 21 29 28 ~i ..., 0 0:
I- 20
SW 1/4 NW 1/4
SEC. 28 i i i i
EXISTING SR 24 ---------­
TO YAKIMA
L LINE __.,,­
DETAIL A
NOT TO SCALE

/ ,,
SR 24 ----------------:iIL__
PEDESTRIAN/BICYCLE
TRAIL 5 ..., I-0:z
BEGINNING OF PLAN
STA. L 66+00 P.O.T. AHD.=
STA. 11A 66+00 P.O.T. (13.S' RT.) BK.
MP 0.15 0 0 0:
I­ " z ~~
C

0 w "::l ;;:c 0 ~ :;
NE 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 28
END OF PLAN
STA. L 74+11.23 P.O.T. BK.=
STA. 74+18.32 P.O.C. (36.86' RT.) AHD.
MP 0.30
TURNBACK
LINE
I;;

~ g ( 5-05816 ) w :J z
NW 1/4 SW 1/4
SEC. 28 .J
L_____________
PEDESTRIAN & BICYCLE TRAFFIC WILL BE
PERMITTED ACCESS AND USE DESIGNATED
ON THE L LINE BElWEEN THE STA. L 66+00
SEE 100.08
AND STA. L 72+28.
EXAMPLE 1-4

ACCESS TO THE TRAIL WILL BE PERMITTED
ONLY AT:
STA. L 71+89 RT.
STA. L 72+28 LT.
SR 24
FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO CITY
W c 19+00.67 A.P. 5-06164 )
SR 82 TO W. BIRCHFIELD ROAD
I

YAKIMA COUNTY 1------------------­
ACCESS REPORT PLAN
FULL, PARTIAL AND MODIFIED CONTROL
MP 0.15 TO MP 0.30
STATION L 66+00 TO STATION L 74+11.23
SECTION CORNER FOUND 2" x 3" STEEL PLATE IN
CONCRETE
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON 32 i i: ~ !;;: ;1----r-------------.----.-------.---------,----~---~
LEGEND /////////

ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS ~, i----i------------+----+-----l-------1------1--------" ii----t--------+-----+----+---+------J.---~
Et----t-----------+----+-----l---------1------1--------" ~Et----!-----------+----+-----l-----+------1----~ c____-~)
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS .....................
PROPERTY LINES _.=2.A~L~L~AR~EA~S~A~RE,!.:__SH_O_WN_LI_N_S~QU~A~R~E~
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. 50
SCALE IN FEET
PROJECT ENGINEER
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK ~lrn'.;-;;;c;:;-;=-t-------:-::::-;:,-----+-=-::-:-:---==-+---=-:.,..--l-------1------1--------"
LT. REMAINDER RT.
EASM'T

PARCEL NO.
NAME
TOTAL AREA
R/W ~i~T~O~T~~A~R~EA;'-';;:IS~F~R~O~M~A~s=sE~S~SO~R=·s:--------'--o-::'-"w"""'~N"-"='E~R..L_S_H.!.!!.!.l~P-S_L__ 0
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. 33
DATE PE SIGNED
APPROVED AND ADOPTED 100
Reference roval
Revision Descri tion
B

SHEET 2
OF 2
SHEETS
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER LEGEND
T.13N. R.19E. W.M.
SECTION CORNER (CALC.)
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS /////////
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS ( -
PROPERTY LINES 100
SCALE IN FEET

23+68.35 P.I.
SW 1/4 NW 1/4
SEC. 28 28+49.22 P.O.T. = 23+98.62 P.0.C.
S 89"17'39" E ( 5-05826 )
FC 19+03.49 P.0.T. =
L 67+06.63 P.O.T.(173.54'LT.)
S 89"14'30" E BK.=
S 89"17'57" E AHD.
FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO CITY

11A LINE
EXISTING SR 24 -----------­ 1/4 CORNER FOUND
IRON PIPE IN CASE
AND COVER
FC LINE 200
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

FC 20+00.86 P.C.
S 88°58'23"E ) 74+08.74 P.O.C.=
L 74+03.56 P.0.T. (37.27' LT.)
TO YAKIMA
L LINE 27+27.73 P.T.
DETAIL A
NOT TO SCALE
PEDESTRIAN/BICYCLE
TRAIL
L 68+67.13 P.C.

BEGINNING OF PLAN
STA. L 66+00 P.O.T. AHD.=
STA. 11A 66+00 P.O.T. (13.5' RT.) BK.
MP 0.15
NE 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 29
L 72+03.39 P.T.
L 72+01.33 P.0.C.=
W 27+36.05 P.0.T. ~1·~ ( 5-05816 ) ~
END OF PLAN
STA. L 74+11.23 P.O.T. BK.=
STA. 74+18.32 P.O.C. (36.86' RT.) AHD.
MP 0.30

q li
TYPE D APPROACH IS AN OFF AND ON
APPROACH IN A LEGAL MANNER NOT TO
EXCEED 50 FEET IN WIDTH FOR USE
NECESSARY TO THE NORMAL OPERATION
OF A COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. IT MAY
BE SPECIFIED AT A POINT SATISFACTORY
TO THE STATE AT OR BElWEEN
DESIGNATED HIGHWAY STATIONS. ....~...................................................... i i * ~ . . . . . . . . . il~6'
PEDESTRIAN & BICYCLE TRAFFIC WILL BE
PERMITTED ACCESS AND USE DESIGNATED
ON THE L LINE BElWEEN THE STA L 66+00
AND STA. L 72+28.
ACCESS TO THE TRAIL WILL BE PERMITTED
ONLY AT:
STA. L 71+89 RT.
STA. L 72+28 LT.

~ i
FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO COUNTY
W 19+00.67 A.P.
W 14+43.69 (57.13' RT.)
SR 82 TO W. BIRCHFIELD ROAD
ACCESS HEARING PLAN
FULL, PARTIAL AND MODIFIED ROAD
MP 0.15 TO MP 0.30
STATION L 66+00 TO STATION L 74+11.23
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF lRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON

( 5-06164 )
SECTION CORNER FOUND 2" x 3" STEEL PLATE IN
CONCRETE !;;c
IL-----------------------------------------------------------------------~ 5-06275
A 5--06164
A ~, L-===---1-~-----------L------L------l--------l------+------l--------------------l--------1 5-05827
A f ~I
SR 24
YAKIMA COUNTY !i ( 5-05817 )
A FOR AREAS SEE SR 82, E. YAKIMA AVE.
TO UNION GAP, SHEET 6 OF 11 SHEETS
APPROVED MAY 5, 1959

EXAMPLE 1-5 ( 5-06275 ) •••••••••••••000,,00,,,,,,,,,,p i i:
SEE 100.09 !i
S 89°26'03" E
APPROACH IS RESTRICTED FOR USE BY
TRAFFIC AS A RIGHT IN RIGHT OUT ONLY.
NW 1/4 SW 1/4
SEC. 28
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR"

32 33
SOCIETY
L :5-05826
B ~ t j :HUMANE @~~ ~~~======t=2~.6~5GA~=t=:§:o.~06~A=j=::}2}.59~A=j=====i=====t===================t=====i------------------------------------------------, 5-05817
CITY OF YAKIMA 5-05816
A 5
L-=~----'--=------------'--TO-T-AL_A_R_EA----'---R/W----1---LT-.-RE-M-'A1LND-E-R-R-T.----11---EA-sM-'T---1-----c-EN-T-ER-L1-NE.:..:w_o~== '-'::::..oP-=-~~"-~-cH-si:-A-T1-oN---+----=~=--P.;:;.:-PARCEL NO.
NAME 61 ~A---l------'3~15 45~ A ' - - - l - - - - - - l - -7 ,._ ~ ~ = - - - l - ~ ~ = ~ - - - 1 - - . ! ! !10 :·~ !.c.!.·: ' . . . . ! : A ~ - l - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - - - - + - - - - - , , - - - , - - - - - - - I
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK

~J L!!R!:!EC::!O~R!!;D~S~U~N~L=E2;SS~O!!T!!H!:!ER~Wl~SE=..2:N~O!!T~ED~._
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
OWNERSHIPS
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
ACCESS APPROACH SCHEDULE _ _ __:::_::....:..:....::..::::..:...;~:..:....:..:..::.......:=----....!:F~EE:.;T:...!!UN::L::E~S:!S.:O!!T~H:=E:.RW1::::S:!:E.:N:::O!!T.!:E:::D.'----L----=--=-=-=-=-=--==---..:....:..:....:....:..:....:...:...:...=.:....:._:....::....:....:...=..:....:..::..::;__ _1....~Refe:::::re=nce:::.._..J_~::!:'°~va:::..I
PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE PE SIGNED
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET

2
OF
SHEETS -===::--:=-:-:=-:-'.===-::=::--::-::-:==;:'
J__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.:.R:::e:::Vi:;::si:,::on~De:::.•:::cn::..:"t::l~io::..:n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __,__.B:L..I_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ti
FC LINE
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER TOTAL CURVE DATA
CURVE DATA
SPIRAL DATA
Pl STATION
DELTA

TANGENT
RADIUS
LENGTH a
DE
Ls 58+97.89 19°14'34" 1021.37' 18°14'34" 5730' 1824.41' 1 0°30'00" 1
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

CURVE DATA
Pl STATION
DELTA
RADIUS
TANGENT
LENGTH
CL 1 13+40. 70 34°34'14" 573' 178.31' 345.73'
CL 1 19+07.01 49°58'24 286.50' 133.52' 249.89'
LEGEND
T.19N. R.3E. W.M.

ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS /////////
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS c- )
PROPERTY LINES 0 50 100
SCALE IN FEET
AL1 6+08.50 (60' RT.) \ ~ c \ 3-08701 ) \
AL 1 5+70 (50' LT.) \ \
CL 1 20+23.38 (70' RT.)
FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO CITY ~~~ R':(~2 30 '. ':
TURNBACK
LINE

......... -·· \
CL 1 19+07.01 P.I. \
CL 1 18+50 80' 70' RT. ff; .. "f?. ....·"""""""-'""'m»,~ ,7;,.__ \ "" .•:,.;,;; ;;;;./f'?tfl?' '....ttlf!,r,,,/''
AL 1 4+42.30 (57.98' LT.) \
COMM.
BLDG. • 'k0 0 c 3-08542 )
AL1 2+50 (70' LT.)
M 1--------, ot --­ '' '' ' \ ~ \
AL 1 1+57.82 (70' LT.) \ \ \ \ \
N\ \ \ \

UNDERCROSSING 42+20.75 P.O.T. =
AR1 0+00 P.O.T. =
AL1 0+00 P.O.T.
TO
SR 5 - __./ / / / \ \
CL1 15+08.09 P.T. ~
I 53+00 (120'LT.) ' ''
TYPE D APPROACH IS AN OFF AND ON
APPROACH IN A LEGAL MANNER NOT TO
EXCEED 50 FEET IN WIDTH FOR USE
NECESSARY TO THE NORMAL OPERATION
OF A COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. IT MAY
BE SPECIFIED AT A POINT SATISFACTORY
TO THE STATE AT OR BETWEEN
DESIGNATED HIGHWAY STATIONS .

" :a: w w
EXHIBIT A ::c
CJ) w 45 -c 3 ..~ so
SR 512
N89°49'58.84"E 3­ 48+76.47 T.S. 49+76.47 S.C. • • ~ • • ~ ~ •• • • z ::c
SR 5 INTERCHANGE VICINITY
TO STEELE STREET VICINITY :J (.) ~ ~
TO
PUYALLUP • • ~ :a: 0.. ~ :a:~ .,: !:;;:
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON

DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR"
SEE 100.03(4) Bullet 5 ~o 1-------,-------------..--------,-------r-------,-------r------..--------------------.-------, '------l-------------+-------l------+--------1------+------+--------------------+------~ ci ~ '-------l-------------+--------1------+-------;------+------+---------------------i------~ ~" ~ ,.1 l---------l-------------+--------1------+-------;------+------+---------------------t------~ l ~-----L------------l-------L----;-::-::cc-,:-""'.'."'."'.,.,.,-+--...,,.,..,,.,..,---l------l------l--------..,.,--:-:,--:-::-::::----------+--------::-----------------~~~~~~~~~-~~~~~~~-~~~~~-~~~----------., "- t e--.::...3·0:.::8.:..::70..:...1----1--=CA:..::.P..:..:IT.:..::AL:.._S::.....:.:.:IN..:..:VE=-=S.:..:.TM::.:Ec..:.NT:.......::..:CO:.:..R::...:P·_----1-_.:...:5:..:,9,.:...:70..:..:1-+-A.:.:.C.::..::CE:..:.SS=----=-O:..:.:NL:..:..Y+-_5:..:.9,c:_:70:..:..1- + - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - + - - - - - - - A : - : - L - - : - 1 - - : : 6 _ +3,.,...3.,....,RT=-.- - - - - - + - - - - : D , - - - - - - - - - 1 1
WHENEVER PO /BL E, LEA VE TH/
N Q 009
PIERCE COUNTY
RIGHT OF WAY AND LIMITED ACCESS PLAN
FULL AND MODIFIED CONTROL
MP 1.01
MP 0.76 TO
STATION 40+00 TO
STATION 53+00

MATCH LINE SHEET 4 0
EXAMPLE 1-6
I-
CL 1 10+00 P.O.T. = 52+53.85 (44' LT.)
CL 1 13+40.68 ss9°s9·s9.01"E 8+ 0.. 52+53.85 (120' LT.) \ -~ ...J \
CL1 13+50 (90', 80' RT.) \ w
LIMITED ACCESS ESTABLISHED BY THE DIRECTOR
ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENGINEERING PROGRAMS
FINDINGS AND ORDER ADOPTED JUNE 1, 2004 \ ~/ i£~ \
FOR ACCESS HEARING PLAN SEE PLAN OF
SAME TITLE APPROVED SEPTEMBER 4, 2003

\ !1 ~ 40+00 (140' LT.) \
I \w \ ~
THIS PLAN SUPERSEDES SHEETS 3, 4 AND 5 OF 6 SHEETS,
SR 512, SR 5 VICINITY TO AINSWORTH AVE. VICINITY,
APPROVED AUGUST 21, 1998. \ ~ \ i-:i w\ \ ' ' '\
GRADE INTERSECTION
CL 1 22+09.46 P.O.T. =
AL 1 3+72.30 P.O.T. \ \
CL 1 17+73.46 P.C. ~ ......... ~ \ \ \
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES ARE DETERMINTED FROM
WASHINGTON STATE COORDINATE SYSTEM SOUTH ZONE (NAD 83/91). THE DISTANCES SHOWN ARE GROUND DISTANCES.
FOR SURVEY INFORMATION SEE RECORD OF SURVEY SR 512,
STEELE ST. VICINITY, RECORDED MAY 26, 2004
AFN 20040526900022

\
CL 1 20+23.38 PT. t­ 0$ 1-----=3--=-0..:.8c....54=2--1-CS-=EE=---=Sc...H=E=-ET'--3---------+-----+-------+-----~-----1--------+------=-=,-,=:,.,,..,-c-=A_L:-:1:-5-,-+4,..,0,..,,...,LT...,....,..,,.--==-=-=-::-:-:------;----=D:-:::-:::-----a § ~ 1---PA:..:R..:..:C:..:E=L..:..N:..::o.:..... ..:..:N:..:AMc.cE=-------..J_--=T-=-o..:..:TA-=L:....:A..:.R-=E-A---'---R-NJ _ __,__ _ _
LT_._R_EM_A_1_ND_E_R_RT_._ __,___E_A_s_M_'T_-+-_ _ _ _c_E_N_TE_R_L_1N_E_o_F_AP_P_R_o_Ac_H_s_TA_T_1o_N_ _ _~_ _ _
TY_P_E____
L __ _ _ _ ss s
SPACE EM p TY FQR REV/SJ Q N 8 LQCK
PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE PE SIGNED
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
STATE SURVEY MANAGER

~30 ~R~EC~O:.'.R~D~S~U~N~L=E~SS::..._:O~T.'.:'.H~ER~Wl~S=-E~N~O~T.'.:ED~-------=::....::...:..:...:::...:::..:_:.:::...:.....:.:..::........:::::...._
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
OWNERSHIPS _ __'._F.'ALL
AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
ACCESS APPROACH SCHEDULE ~ - - - - . . - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~...~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . ~
SHEET 5
OF 7
SHEETS .::EE=.:Tc....::'..U:.:::NL::::E:::S:::.S....:0:.:T~H:.:::E:.:.RWl:::::S:.:::E....:N.::.::0:.:T..:::E.:::D:...._ _L__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __L_..!.!R:C.:en.:::er:.c:e:.::nce:::':.......L..'.:::A!:'.!pp:'.!.ro~v~a!...I.L__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _..:.R::.:::e~vi::,::Si::,::On.:.._:::D~es~c::,:ri!:'.:pt::.:::iO::.:.n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __,_..::B:Ly_.__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-;::;-;-;::;-;-;:;::-~;:::-;:-;-;;~--;::;-;::;:::~;:::--;::;;--;:::-~;-;-;-;;;;=;::;­
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER CURVE DATA
T.30N. R.4W. W.M. ,,''

I ---!--~ "\.~--­ --.:;:;,,.----:~--., . ~ ~ ~ \ ,,'' ,,,,'' ''W ,,.
I E~,~~ : _--=:;;--, -SF- '\O'\
SEC. 24 -a::-:::~-­ i~
I ~ lr i1 11 11 -------- ----------­ --------­ 11 ,1 11 11 11 11 11 1: ::
TURNBACK LINE
SW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 24 .,j ,,: :
L-'' 1 ' ' t ----,­
BAY
II

. /' 1:
I ''
I ::
R 21+70.34 P.0.T.=
RIV1 10+00 P.0.T. ( 3-07631 ) lffi DW~ lffi lffi [Q) •
D[NJ 1r ~ lffi ~[}=l] ~[NJ@~
RIV1 12+00 (65'LT.) '' lffi lffi @ [Q)
I [NJ[ffi 1rDW lffi~ [}=l] ~[NJ@~ ~ ~ ' ,,,,'''' ,,,, ,,11'-_ ,:' " "" , 10
VICINITY MAP ,,''"'
RIV1 11+43.25 P.C.

···"'··-~=;=;=r~::;,:.:~====:::::::::::.'i"'""'.:~~!:!!_
Ir' ii ............................., ........................ ' , --1F=~·;;.···::;··,:.:··:.:.···;;;··;;.··.. :~ ,,,, ::r2 ,, : 0 .............. ..... ········· .... 11 11 l1z 1' ,,,,
I
D
LENGTH 162.94' 301' 152.17' 141.89' 125.87' ----------­ -----------­ ········ ......... ·············· .... 1,­ 110
TO
DISCOVERY" ~
TANGENT 81.75' 151.1' 76.50' 71.13' 80.20' +-, 25
RADIUS 800' 1400' 600' 800' 80' ::F :: ---­ ~------+­
SW 1/4 SE 1/4 I

-­ .;.
DELTA 11'40'10" RT. 12'19'00'' LT. 14'31'52" LT. 10'09'43" RT. 90'08'45" RT. : :fer--r, --ji:-~-=---a SH. 'CJ~ n"i""i" W7 uu u ~~@(UJ~[i¥1]
CD
LINE 24
FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO CITY ,,'' - ­ - ­ ~ ~ S E 1/41­
NE 1/4 SW 1/4
SEC. 24
P.I. STATION
RIV1 12+25
RIV1 16+06.97
RIV2 12+00
RIV2 15+41.70
MD 15+31.19

T.30N. R.4W. W.M. ,,,, :1 ,, 500 1000
SCALE IN FEET ,,,,,, ,, ~ANr.,~,­ ~ '' ,·
UNDERCROSSING 423+63.66 P.O.T. =
R 20+00 P.O.T.
RIV1 18+00 (75'LT.) ''C) )N ,' w
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERlY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTh'IENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

) :!: '..J ' :°'
RIV1 16+06.97 428+03.73 P.C. ,,,," ,,,, ,,'I :,
RIV2 15+41.70 P.I.
RIV2 1+23.50 P.C.
R 18+29.61 P.O.T.=
RIV2 10+00 P.O.T.
RIV2 12+75.67 P.T.
N 88"40' 35" E ' ' ': ''
RIV2 15+00 (60'RT.) ~
RIV2 10+64.86 (70' RT.)

RIV2 16+12.46 P.T. 15
RIV2 LINE =-­
EXHIBIT MAP
SR 101
SEQUIM BYPASS
MD 17+04.03 A.P. ,, ,' ------------­ - - - S 87"54'43" E ,
TURNBACK LINE l ' '
I
CLALLAM COUNTY ' ' ' '
R 16+50 (40'RT.)

''
I'
SEE 100.07
SEE 100.00(5)
RIV2 14+70.57 P.C.
TURNBACK
LINE
PARCELS 3•07631 & 3-07636
MD 15+76.86 P.T.
MD 14+50.98 P.C.

FOR RELINQUISHMENT
TO COUNTY
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
MATCH LINE SHEET 4
EXAMPLE 1-7 i i: ~ :;;!: a.o
LEGEND oll u "'i iill-----+-----------+-----+-----+-----+-----+---------1
E ,._ E ~I ~J ti
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR"

3-07636
BOUSHEY (CORNISH), JOHN 3-07631
ZALEINSKI, STAN
PARCEL NO.
NAME
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. 81,337 211,041
TOTAL AREA 79,229 46,057
R/W
OWNERSHIPS

2,108 164,964
LT. REMAINDER RT.
EASM'T
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS /////////
PROPERlY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS ( -
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS )
PROJECT ENGINEER
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK

PROPERlY LINES 50
SCALE IN FEET
DATE SIGNED BY STATE
SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED 100
Reference roval
Revision Descri tion
B
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET

OF
SHEETS
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER EXAMPLE 1-8
SR 405
S.E. 64TH ST. VIC.
TO S.E. 30TH ST. VIC
KING COUNTY
RIGHT OF WAY AND LIMITED ACCESS PLAN
FULL CONTROL
MP 8.45 TO MP 8.64
STATION 54+16.58 TO STATION 64+00
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON

.WX
DP
BC OFWASHINYZ
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK 12345
NE
ER
R
G
D
F
PRO

WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS
TE
N
TO
S
T
A
SEE 100.09
ES EGISTERE I
G
SI
ONAL EN

PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE SIGNED BY PE
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
RIGHT OF WAY PLANS MANAGER
SHEET 1
OF 10
SHEET CURVE
P.I. STATION 255+64.49
DATA
DELTA 17°35;35" RT.

RADIUS
TANGENT
LENGTH 2,500' 386.86' 767.64'
MR 6+10
I
NE 1/4 NE 1/4
SEC. 27 60'
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.
OWNERSHIPS

NAME
TOTAL AREA
LT. REMAINDER RT.
RM/ r-,~l,:
I , : z "'"';l m j
MR 6+10 _ { : I m (60', 75'RT.J
SEE 100.03(1) en ;;u
MR 8+81.63 (60', 62.47' LT.)
UI ~ i. 249+70 (60', 75'LT.) 251+55± (75', 55'LT.)~ ------------­ ., .:'_ 253+01.30 (70'LT.) 257+41.82 B0.24'L = 257+59.5 (50'LT 1938 C/L) a= 1 213 254+81± 70' 69.60' LT. 255+00± (50' LT. 1938 C/L)
L= 2.4

~-------~-1 -----------­ --­ de= 4"48' 253+01.77 255+34.97 73.45' LT. = 255+54.5 (SO' LT. 1938 GIL)
1938 GIL* -J--------~~--7-J ----------­ * SPIRAL DATA SHOWN
REFERENCES RM/
CENTERLINE PER SR 9,
WOODINVILLE TO SNOHOMISH,
APPROVED MAY 24, 1938
NOTE:
ON MANAGED HIGHWAYS THERE
SHALL BE NO RIGHT OF WAY LINE
SEPERATING 11-IE STORMWATER
TREATMENT AREA AND HIGHWAY
WITHIN 11-IE CITY LIMITS

SE 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 22 ~ '
I ----­ - - - _:::_.._ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ - - - - -- ­ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- ­ - - _,::_~ ' - ----::..----.... - -R= -1,482.39' ---....- - - - - - - 1I ­ - - l= 213.44 1 ~ 1 \ ------­ \ r---1. 2 }----=2~4~5:..________i:fit~~t::::;;;~:~;~2=----...:.N;..;,1•.;;2~1·;20;,,",,;E:__ _ _ _ _...,_ _2~5""Q---.-.--====!illlll•S=R._~9==~=====-=-=----------.-;;.-.,--.,-.-.-.-=-:::_:::_:::_:::_-:_;-::..;;.::::-~-=-=-=-=-~--~-~-~-~--~-­ ;~-~~-~~---~--=---=--=--=--:--:::-:--~-~:--~--=--~_/___ :: ~:
T ... _
FOR RM/ EASTERLY, SEE SR 524,
JCT. SR 9 TO JCT. SR 522,
SHEET 1 OF 1 SHEET,
ADOPTED OCTOBER 27, 1995 t:j r\
I i:--·
I\
I'.
I
I "

/ , <65 RT) (65', 70'RT.) 250+70 (70',BO'RT.) -------­ ------------.... ~~ ---~-­ o!'.!. ................. 258• 00 (90', BO' RT.) j5? 0.. f- w z :::!::. ...JW >W
WC/l ~ili oz mo (!) F=
SR 9 ~~ ~~ ~~ ~ r-,,;
SR 524 TO 197TH ST SE VIC
SNOHOMISH COUNTY ti--_. : ~: ___ ;
RIGHT OF WAY PLAN
MP 1.54 TO MP 1.81
STATION 244+50 TO STATION 258+50
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON

j tr_,'
L'.__ :
I
SEC. 23
FOR SURVEY INFORMATION SEE RECORD OF SURVEY SR 9,
SR 524 (MALTBY RD) VIC. TO 164TH ST SE VIC. RECORDED IN
SNOHOMISH COUNTY, WASHINGTON ON JANUARY 3, 2007
UNDER AFN 200701035253. ~ , -----l ~
THE DISTANCES SHOWN ARE GROUND DISTANCES. ~/\ .­ ~.t ~: :­___ -~ ~-~-~---- ~N:-~~I_L~-­- a:::!: ~g
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES ARE
DETERMINED FROM WASHINGTON COORDINATE
SYSTEM NORTH ZONE (NAD 83/91).

11
I 1~ ~ ~ ~
SW 1/4 SW 1/4
THIS PLAN SUPERSEDES SHEETS 9 AND 10
OF 18 OF SR 9, SR 522 TO CLEARVIEW VIC.,
APPROVED SEPOINTEMBER 16, 1994. u, ........
I --1.._ -----­ ~ (B0',90'RT.)
I l,,",
I -­ 11 ,r::--------r~J"'"--------:=,---------------------­ ~ ~ / I / f ~,\ =-.,::::::::::::::::::::==;::::: .................
I

9--c- - - - - - - - --i-r= ~Jl,-----,i--"____ ---------­
L\
I ,, ~
I '
I , , 246•34.8 =
AP. MR 10+00 ~-;;,..----r~0~,
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTMENT OF llRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

100
STORMWATER
TREATMENT AREA "'! 247+55.68 (57'LT.)
NW 1/4 NW 1/4
SEC. 26 ) _.__ _ _ _ __,,_ _ __ , , ; , ~ - - ~
MATCH LINE SEE THIS SHEET
MR 8+95.30 (42'RT.)
BEGINNING OF PLAN
STA. 244+50
MP 1.54

c­
I i'-TJ r­
FOR RM/ SOUTHERLY, SEE SR 9,
SR 522 TO CLEARVIEW VIC.,
SHEET 9 OF 18 SHEETS,
APPROVED SEPTEMBER 16, 1994. ;~. R~)94. 35
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS 50 !ii:
I:
I ,:
MR 8+70 (41', 42' RT.)

R= 55.50'
L= 54.95' /////////
SCALE IN FEET ;;u j 1': ~ (61.S'RT.)
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS
PROPERTY LINES , u,
TO WOODINVILLE
LEGEND
EASM'T 75' ~ (70', 41' RT.)
PARCEL NO.
LIMIT OF PLAN
SR 524 STA. MR 5+20 P.O.T. AHD.=
SR 524 STA. 4+80 P.O.T. BK.
SR 524 MP 12.75

MATCH LINE SEE THIS SHEET 70'
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.
T.27N. R.SE. W.M.
FOR RM/ WESTERLY, SEE
SR 524, JCT. SR 527 TO JCT.
SR 9, SHEET 2 OF 2 SHEETS,
ADOPTED OCTOBER 27, 1995 '<
I
I~

EXAMPLE 1-9a
MR 15+15
LIMIT OF PLAN
SR 524 STA. MR 15+15 P.O.T. BK.=
SR 524 STA. 76+74.4 P.0.T. AHD.
SR 524 MP 12.94
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR"

PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE SIGNED BY STATE
SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
Reference
Approval
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET 2
OF
SHEETS

RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER CURVE DATA
P.I. STATION 263+94.15 269+94.57
DELTA 2'17'26" LT. 2'17'26" LT.
RADIUS 10,500' 10,500'
TANGENT 209.92' 209.92'
LENGTH 419.78' 419.78'
T.27N. R.SE. W.M. ~ ~ \ ~ 'i \ \~ I \ ~~ ~i 'iI \ ::I ----------­
I \ ~~ g,1r: \\ _.,.,..-­ \ ii: \ ii I \ -~ ' \ i!!l \\
SEE 100.03(1)
I \

\ \\ \
SE 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 22 \ ~ ~ \ \ k --­ -----­ -----­ v-~O -----­ -­ :{)
THE DISTANCES SHOWN ARE GROUND DISTANCES. l~O
FOR SURVEY INFORMATION SEE RECORD OF SURVEY SR 9,
SR524 (MALTBY RD) VIC. TO 164TH ST SE VIC. RECORDED IN
SNOHOMISH COUNTY, WASHINGTON. ON JANUARY 3, 2007
UNDER AFN 200701035253. _ -­ - c1-14848 ) \ c 1.14931 ) 272+30
S 88°49"31" E
SR 9

TEMPORARY
CONSTRUCTION
I
EASEMENT : \ \ 26S ~--=~~~~~-'!'r""-----------------------------------~ -------­ ..·r" =-=- ~ 269+94.56 P.I., - , 270 · ­----------------------------- ------ ­_,~ _ g ·'\~,~ ­ - ­ - - - - ­ - ­ J' :il ~
II - \ \ 259+45.27 P.T. '' __ _
S 88°49"30" E
N 88"53"03'" E - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - }­ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -272;04~4-f P.T. ' ·--~---.--.--.:":":":":.~.:":":":": ........ ,._ \ ' ,,, ' ~ ' .---T"-------~-----------\----------~ ',,:~\ --...-~-----­ '' ' ' '' '' '', '' ""'_____ 266+90 /-;:;-(75', 85'RT.) 260+50 (90', 70' RT.) ' '
EASEMENT 260+19:t (90'RT.) -~--".,...I--\-.......,._____
EASEMENT 263+76± (110'RT.) c 264+10 (110', 70'RT.) ·... 270+50 (65', 70' RT.) --­ 272+00 [/O', SO' RT.)
I -x- -x- -x- -x-._

X 266+70 _,,___..Jr c 1-14846 ) 1-14844 ) ( (75', 65' RT.) 267+40 (85', 75'RT.)
I (120', 75' RT.) * * y-'A .y­
SW 1/4 SW 1/4
SEC. 23 c 1-14847 )
I
SR 9
TEMPORARY
CONSTRUCTION
EASEMENT ~ \ ~---------­ 267+84.65 P.C. i i:
THIS PLAN SUPERSEDES SHEETS 10 AND 11
OF 18 SHEETS OF SR 9, SR 522 TO CLEARVIEW VIC.,
APPROVED SEPOINTEMBER 16, 1994.
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES ARE
DETERMINED FRDM WASHINGTON CDDRDINATE
SYSTEM NORTH ZONE (NAD 83191).

.,,;i,i,j'iiiiii"iiiiii"iiiii,"iiiii,i'iiiii,'iiiii,i''·;:..___________liiiiii'iiiii,'iiiiii,'iiiiiiiiiii'iiiiii'iiiii,'iii,ii'lliiiii,,'iiiii'iiiiiiiiiiii'iliiiiiiiii'iiiiiiiiii'iiiii'' ' · ---------------------\ ----­---------­ ... ~:--------­ ---­ 265+90 (69.76', 105'LT.)
TO WOODINVILLE -.. __...­ o\/E.?I ~ I!,\)\\. - - - - -­ ~ ­ - - __ - __... __... __...-~..._ _ _ e,~---------­ -----­ ---­ ~o~O - - - -
REFERENCES R/W
CENTERLINE PER SR 9,
WOODINVILLE TO SNOHOMISH,
APPROVED MAY 24, 1938 \ ~ \ ~ \
CULVERT & WALL
EASEMENT -­ -­ * SPIRAL DATA SHOWN -' :$ ---­ -----­ \
I \
NE 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 22

---­ -----­ -----­ - - - -- ­ - -;.:;;--:.----­ ----- ----­ -­ ~'e\ I \ ~i \ \
SR 524 TO 197TH ST SE VIC
SNOHOMISH COUNTY
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

NW 1/4 SW 1/4
SEC. 23 8
RIGHT OF WAY PLAN
MP 1.81 TO MP 2.07
STATION 258+50 TO STATION 272+50
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
EXAMPLE 1-9b
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR"

:;;!: a.o ~ll ~i
LEGEND
I!'!~ "'ii i l l - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - - - + - - - - - + - - - - - + - - - - - + - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - 1
E ,._ E ~I
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS )
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
PROPERTY LINES
PARCEL NO.
NAME
AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S ~J TOTAL
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. ti

c
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS
TOTAL AREA
RMI
OWNERSHIPS
LT. REMAINDER RT.
EASM'T
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. 50
SCALE IN FEET

PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE SIGNED BY STATE
SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED 100
Reference
Approval
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET
OF
SHEETS

RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER CURVE DATA
P.I. STATION 1945+11.4
HR 10+95.9
HR 19+71.B
DELTA 75°42' LT. 74°21'RT. 45°49' LT.
RADIUS 2865' 191' 286.50'
TANGENT 2226.3' 144.B' 121.1'
LENGTH 3785' 247.B' 229.1'
T.1 SN. R.3SE. W.M. 1'3 \ \ 1'3 \ \ \ \ \ \ \ i. ..,, ~\ \
I

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .t==.. . . . . . . . . . . . 1925+50 (75'LT.) \ \ \ s··sg04;fl~................................... 1925+75 120'LT) · '· 406 3 ~ \ ~ , .... ~:..........\.~[16:~·....:-:::
SECTION CORNER FOUND 3/4" REBAR W/CAP SET
BY H.S.STEVENS,
PLS 00000 1-7-81
T.16N.
T.15N . 1 \::
TO OTHELLO
HR 10+95.9 P.I.\
NW 1/4 NE 1/4
SEC. 23

HR 9+51.1 P.C.
II
I l= '<\ \\
NE 1/4 NE 1/4
L'\
HR 14+49.1 AP. 7 ~7"" 1s, ~,'ft" tF/'~"' ,P~ :.::1,1,'·o ~~ ~,/~ 9·Ja·e /~ , . ~­ ; \ ;I; \ 1930+12 P.0.C. =
HR 25+02 P.O.T. :11 ! ~ 19+71.8 P.I. :~ c 6-00321 ) 1 : 29 31 32 6-00327 ~ 7,g~ (75'LT.) ;1 '~
T.15N.
T.14N. ~1933+35 , (120'LT.)
QUARRY SITE
QS-AD-112

~.t' !1 ' , ,,,.,,HR 30 : ,,.,,.;t.;.~ ',
HR 20+19.8 P.T. "' ---s~:¥-.:--~\-­
I ; (~~
HR 11+98.9 P.T. --J­­ .:~­ ;~~
1 s 7 ­ - - -=-- -­ ,,,.,..
I \ ' \1., ~~o,:1;
HR 1 7 + 9 0 . 7 ~ . C ./~~~', \ ~ --.~ 1932+92.4 P.O.C. '/ i:II"'~ ',', ,, ,, ':,~, ,,,. ..... ', ,, z ,, o., ' ,, !t'
VICINITY MAP AND
TOTAL PARCEL DETAILS " '~ :i - - - - - - - - - -,f/­- - - -T­ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - t­ - - SW 1/4 NE 1/4
SEC. 23

0~ : ll 'l' ij ; 2
SCALE IN MILES
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES
DETERMINED BY MONUMENTATION ON EAST
LINE SECTION 23 AS NOTED ON RECORD OF
SURVEY BY H.S. STEVENS RECORDED
JANUARY 1, 1981 1
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED. PROPOSED
PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN ACQUIRED. ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY
NOT BE SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT THE
DEPARTh1ENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS OFFICE
FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE. FOR
ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT THE
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES
OFFICE.

! :I !
I I~
S 83'2 / / 1'30" E / HR 0+00.0 P.0.T. •­ : • 280'
SE 1/4 NE 1/4
SEC. 23
Ii
SEE 100.05(2)(i) ;1 23i24
ADAMS COUNTY
SUNDRY SITE PLANS
FOR SR 26 R/W, SEE SR 26,
DELIGHT TO WASHTUCNA,
SHEET 15 OF 24 SHEETS,
APPROVED JANUARY 19, 1960

QUARRY SITE QS-AD-112
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
NW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 23 i i: ~
EXAMPLE 1-10
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR" !;;: ; * HAUL ROAD EASEMENT
LEGEND

~, l----~-----------~----~----~----~~----~-----1 ;1-----+----------+-----+-----+----1-----+-------l ~1----+-~----------+---~-+---~--+---~--,f------+----~-1 7 1 52 5 33 7 i ,__PA-5:-i-:--L_N_O....._?_?_ _ _ _ _NA_M_E-----+-T-0-5:°-A-LA-~-~EA--+---·-:m_A_C_.- + - -- - ·-~-/-~-~-M~Al~N-DE-R-RT-.---+--*-EA­·-~-MA_'TC_.__,
J TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
OWNERSHIPS 0
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. (
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS ) .....................
PROPERTY LINES 200
SCALE IN FEET

SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE SIGNED BY STATE
SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED 400
Reference
Approval
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET 2
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER

T.2SN. R.7E. W.M. •
HARRIS CREEK WETLANDS
MITIGATION AREA
I /'1-,,. 1/4 CORNER -+------------I
I ,/ ,,.,,.",£,. / , , . ; ; __ -·;, \ ---FO-U-ND-BRA_S_S_CA_P_ u, I
I
I _ _ -, , . ',~ ~-~-:-~-~-~------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------r=-_7::;:.;.~ ---..§-!1.:_s1•35.//V 175o94:---___ ---- ;,,./~--~~/ igi! ...-~-r."" z ;~--=--=--~----------
V,,."L_1-­
I Ns_'/EEC1.t44 ~;_;;1:~,,.~-- _.J/_. li .,,-"' __ ,r.."r-·..::.._-...._L ;;;·', . /,,,,.,,,,
A· 1~-­

_/;""11~-- V _- ;~<c.<;,~~~
NW 1/4 NE 1/4
I -I /:
II /// /
I / ---~~~/_/;~t~~--
SEC.9 /o\'lJ~'t-\)'1-" ~ - /-;;"/jW ---/ - " ~1 fI
SW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 4 _/,~;_:// />>r c,_, , , > _ _i_ ,/1 -i_.. i
I ,,.,,." ,,,,
NW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 4

_ ., / ,./ 1 /
J/,' 1,
I ~
I
NE 1/4 NE 1/4
SEC. 9
SE 1/4 SE 1/4 // // ~/ ~ w ~~~NgA:r,ss r' .s,.
VICINITY MAP & TOTAL PARCEL DETAIL 500
SCALE IN FEET 1000 :, ;: /: !,
NE 1S/E4CS.E4 1/4

_/,f :1
SECTION CORNER r fl .o!'>;~ I ~ 1 11 -co ~.~101'1 'I .,1 ~&V",, 1-5531 ) -:---------/7!~/__,_ _------------,,7''._-i_--- ------ -!~ - - -t/ c _,----,--/I , {/ /,,"'",,."(- -- ,
SW 1/4 / , : s 67"15'06"E ......:.,"--~;,,."~-;-:_...~--¢ ,.*" ....-··t =77_; .i:,.. -- -- --- - ~ ­
SEE 100.05(2)(i) //
AND COVER
KING COUNTY
SUNDRY SITE PLANS
HARRIS CREEK
WETLANDS MITIGATION AREA
C

!
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
EXAMPLE 1-11 i i: ~
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR" !;;, * ;~, 1---------------~----~--------~----~--------l
LEGEND
FOR AREAS SEE SR 203, VICINITY NE 77TH STREET,
SHEET 4 OF 4 SHEETS, APPROVED AUGUST 30, 1996

;1-----+----------+-----+------+----1-----+--------l ~1-------11------------+-----+-----1-------+-----+---------l i P:~~:~1No_
N:ME
AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
J TOTAL
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED_ ti
TOTA~ AREA ~
OWNERSHIPS
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS /////////
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS c-
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS

) .....................
PROPERTY LINES
PROJECT ENGINEER
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
DATE SIGNED BY STATE
SURVEY MANAGER :T_ REMAINDER RT_
EASM'T
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED_ 200
SCALE IN FEET

APPROVED AND ADOPTED 400
Reference roval
Revision Descri tion
B
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET 52
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER T.26N. R.43E. W.M.
FOR SR 395 RJW, SEE SR 395,
HASTINGS ROAD TO MP 172,
SHEET 4 OF 15 SHEETS,
APPROVED AUGUST 7, 1992.

__ili__
I : !
T---:---rr--- ---;- ;1 - -=--1­
FARWELL RD. ! :
NW
I
NE 1/4 NW 1/4
NW 1/4 NW 1/4
SEC.a ------- ------- ------------------t-----------------­ "'... -----,-~ ---jI - · :~:-:...........................................23f4f''''"'''"'''"''""'''''' ..
NW 1/4
SEC. a

--t---­
EAST 1/16
CORNER ~r- • . 1
SW 1/4 •
SEC.a
I
I. i \\ !!>1
NE 1/4
SW 1/4 NE 1/4 c!il \\ SEC. a y;­ );,,/';,,/'; : ~s~s~ -+- ~--=- - __ --i- _
MAINTENANCE SITE
MS-C-605
SE 1/4

NW 1/4 - - ~ ~____ _J __ f : "' ~1
I/ _ -1fs----t- \I
SEC. a
I
NW 1/4 i :
WANDERMERE/HASTINGS
ROAD PARK AND RIDE LOT 1~5~Cl._::_;;:. :/ it' ~ 242."ii' ......... . ~~F~"""''i'Si'w'"""'.,i-~--fl 'l"'."'.""""'"""'""···""·"'··"'···""···""···.,,;··s;, .. ,a1~·4~1·1f2",,;W;...,."""'·"'···~· ·""··""···"'··"'···""···"';· ..........._,.,. !:"······· · ""102.ifr... ····· ·,·,· .•.,_. · ···· · ··
336 OB' ~:::;l;,,...,."""'"""'"""'"""'"""'~;;~-;~87~·4~1·~2~· 3o· ·1 ---~~~~------~~-------::; i 1
ROAD PARK AND RIDE LOT 8 ( 6-03937 ) f2
MAINTENANCE SITE
MS-C-605

400
SCALE IN FEET ( 6-04097 ) 800 ,,~· · · · · · · · · ····tn~~~:,~~·'°E ······ ··· : !! i.l~·.~·.:.·::::~·\t:1::.i:i:;i::::.·::::::::?·::.!
I
MAP
VICINITY
N 2°16'48" E 40'
SEE 100.05(2)(i) 30' ·' .. ··•·····•···•·······•··•···· ······· .......?.1!1'9.E?'. ....................•......•..•.. ·····•·····•··•···•··· .. . t.::....................................................
N 57a43'12" E
SW 1/4 NW 1/4
SEC.a

SPOKANE COUNTY
SUNDRY SITE PLANS ······· ...... .
MAINTENANCE SITE MS-C-605
WANDERMERE/HASTINGS ROAD
PARK AND RIDE LOT
SE 1/4 NW 1/4
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
EXAMPLE 1-12 i i: ~
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
DN "MONTH DAY, YEAR"

!;;: ; ~, l - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - - ~ - - - ~ - - - ~ - - - - ~ - - - ~ - - - - - 1
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS ///////// ;1-----+----------+-----+-----+----1-----+--------l
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS ( -
LEGEND ~ 1--6-04'-"-"097=----+-WS=D-'-OT'---------+--'-95=,94-"0'---+-----+----+-----+------I i PA5:;:~7ND. WSDOT
NAME
AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
J TOTAL
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. ti
TO~~~7!~EA
R1W

OWNERSHIPS
LT. REMAINDER RT.
EASM'T
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS ) .....................
PROPERTY LINES
SO
SCALE IN FEET
PROJECT ENGINEER

SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
DATE SIGNED BY STATE
SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED 100
Reference roval
Revision Descri tion
B
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET 14
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER

THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES ARE
DETERMINED FROM WASHINGTON COORDINATE
SYSTEM SOUTH ZONE (NAD 83/91).
T.7N. R.35E. W.M.
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED.
PROPOSED PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN
MAY NOT HAVE BEEN ACQUIRED.
ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY NOT BE
SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT
THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS
OFFICE FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE.
FOR ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES OFFICE.

THE DISTANCES SHOWN ARE GROUND DISTANCES.
I
SEE 100.04
SEE 100.11
SEC. 23 ~ "'
SEC. 23 c 5-06472 5-06900 ) 0 0
SE 1/4 NE 1/4
SW 1/4 NE 1/4
SE 1/4 NW 1/4 383+00 (200' LT.) 384+00 (215' LT.) 387+00 (215' LT.) 388+00 (200' LT.) 0 '; 0 en
M

b 0 "' ------~--------------------~----~------------------------- ~ 365
TO PASCO 370
SR 12
I 375
N 83°08'52" E 380 385
TO WALLA WALLA
I ········ .................................................................................................................................... 366+00 (120' RT.) 367+00 (107' RT_) 383+00 (107' RT.)
I 384+00 (120' RT.)
I
THIS PLAN SUPERSEDES SR 12,
IRELAND RD_ VICINITY TO WALLA WALLA,
SHEET 4 OF 22 SHEETS, APPROVED
AND ADOPTED DECEMBER 6, 2005

........ vvj ---~--~-----~-~
IAl~LLA --·------------·------------­ ··-··.-...·-················
NE 1/4 SW 1/4
SEC. 23 ~ / -----~------------------~----------­
IRELAND RD.
TO WALLA WALLA
LIMITS
WALLA WALLA COUNTY --------------------------~------------ ···­ / if
NW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 23

I 0.. ::;;
I ..J ,, ..J :
I w _J ---....--...----------------------...--..../............ _ CORP. -------------------------------------·------------- !I <t: !I
I
SR 12 / ;i !I
NE 1/4 SE 1/4
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION ii
RIGHT OF WAY AND LIMITED ACCESS PLAN
FULL CONTROL
MP 333-81 TO MP 334-38
STATION 360+00 TO STATION 390+00

::;; 0.. 0..
EXAMPLE 1-13 1'i "' "' ::;;~
LEGEND 0.. ~ 0 gj~ ~.g "~"'"1 t - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - - - - t - - - - - - - - + - - - - - + - - - - - - - + - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - < l-----+------------1-------+-----+-------+------+--------, 5-06900
SEE SHEET 11 r-- 1ii ~ a, ~j ;;; I" ~ ~­ a,
N~ 0
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR" 5-06472
SEE SHEET 11
PARCEL NO_
NAME
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
RECORDS UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED.

TOTAL AREA
RNv
OWNERSHIPS
LT. REMAINDER RT.
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS /////////
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS c-
PROJECT ENGINEER )
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK .....................
PROPERTY LINES

DATE ORIGINALLY SIGNED
BY STATE SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
EASM'T
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
FEET UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED. 0 100
SCALE IN FEET 200
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
SHEET
Letter 11-12-14
Reference

12-13-14
Approval
Added Parcel 5-06900 12
OF 20
SHEETS
ABC
Revision Description
By
Designated For Limited Access Control By Findings and Order Adopted December 5, 2005
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER

CURVE DATA
P.I. STATION
EB90 18+22.45
EB90 23+56.79
DELTA 89°30'38" LT. 73°10'12" RT.
RADIUS 180.45' 295.28'
TANGENT 178.92' 219.17'
LENGTH 281.91' 377.09'
T.24N. R.4E. W.M.
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED.
PROPOSED PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN
MAY NOT HAVE BEEN ACQUIRED.
ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY NOT BE
SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT
THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS
OFFICE FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE.
FOR ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES OFFICE.

' ~ ; --­ . ROYAL BROUGHAM WAY
I --~-----------7 ..---­ / --------­
I ------­ ;E ~
I 2 > <( 8
I 0 [l'. _,/'"
SEC. 5
SURFACE AND SUBSURFACE (EXCLUDING SR 519 STRUCTURE,
RAMPS,AND APPURTENANCES)FOR
RELINQUISHMENT TO CITY PER 4
TURNBACK AGREEMENT TBl-0145

~s--·
EB90 21+37.62 P.C. 5 0 0:::
LL.
LL 1
Cl) ui z w 154
ID ~
N
I ix, ...
I w ~
I f-

6 v 0 0
LINE
SEE 4TH AVE 78+03.38 (199.95' LT.)
SHEET
SURPLUS PROPERTY
ICN 1-17-08661 (3,073 S.F.) z
I I
I 7
MATCH 8 2
RETAINED FILL

N
TRAFFIC MOVEMENT AND ACCESS TO AND FROM CITY STREETS WILL BE
PERMITTED UNDER THE HIGHWAY STRUCTURES AS CLEARANCES PERMIT AT:
STA.EB 5+00 TO STA. 8+13.67 AND 4TH AVE STA. 70+20 TO 4TH AVE STA. 80+87. ///////// c- ) .....................
PROPERTY LINES 0 50 100
SCALE IN FEET
CITY OF SEATTLE STREET INTERSECTION COORD. SYSTEM
INTERSECTION 4TH AVE 82+50
NORTHING [FT]
EASTING [FT]

219,674.000 1,271,369.509
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS AND DISTANCES ARE DETERMINED
FROM CITY OF SEATILE STREET INTERSECTION COORDINATE SYSTEM. w _J 0.. ::;; ~
THE DISTANCES SHOWN ARE GROUND DISTANCES.
GROUND DISTANCES AND GRID DISTANCES ARE THE SAME. 1 1 ---1­
I 11 --?. -­ ::;; 0.. 0.. 1
I 22 --­ ,t:::::: -
II
EB90 25+14.71 P.T.
I

EB90 23+54.82 (28. 37' LT.) 20
R/W FOR BRIDGE I
PIER FOOTING 19 18
EXISTING AIRSPACE CORRIDOR
EB90 15+13.04 TO EB90 23+82.27 ~ ~ ~0 I ~~: ~ 0 e
I~ 17 z 'sl
SEC. S i ,:-. w :::a :c en 9
W
ACCESS AND USE FOR PARCEL 1-15951 WILL BE PERMITTED AS CLEARANCES
PERMIT ACROSS BRIDGE PIER FOUNDATIONS ON THE EB90 LINE SURVEY AS
SHOWN ON THIS PLAN FROM STA. EB90 23+66.01 TO STA. EB90 23+83.24.

~
ACCESS AND USE FOR PARCEL 1-15952 WILL BE PERMITTED AS CLEARANCES
SHOWN ON THIS PLAN FROM STA. EB90 19+16.76 TO STA. EB90 23+83.24 FOR
TRANSIT ONLY ROAD PURPOSES. w z
FOR RIGHT OF WAY AND LIMITED ACCESS NORTHERLY OF STA. EB90 23+82.27
SEE SR 90 4TH AVE. S. TO AIRPORT WAY S., SHEET 3 OF 6 SHEETS, APPROVED
AND ADOPTED MAY 27, 2005. :::J 10
R/W FOR BRIDGE
PIER FOOTING
I

RNV FOR BRIDGE
PIER FOOTING! 15 f [: +!
EB90 19+25.44 P.T. 51.18'
ACCESS TO AND FROM PARCEL 1-15952 SHALL BE PROHIBITED AS SHOWN ON
SR 90, CONNECTICUT ST. INTERCHANGE: 4TH AVE S. AND TRANSIT RAMPS,
SHEET 2 OF 5 SHEETS, APPROVED AUGUST 23, 1985, AND SHEET 3 OF 5 SHEETS,
APPROVED OCTOBER 19, 1983.
EB90 15+13. 35 (28.37' LT.)
ACCESS FEATURES APPROVED,
AFTER SECURING HEARING WAIVERS,
BY DEPUTY STATE DESIGN ENGINEER
ON APRIL 7, 2000.

FOR ADDITIONAL R/W & LIA BELOW 4TH AVE
STRUCTURE SEE SR 90, CONNECTICUT ST.
INTERCHANGE: 4TH AVE. S AND TRANSIT RAMPS,
SHEETS Q THRU 5 OF 5 SHEETS, APPROVED
OCTOBER 19, 1983 AND AUGUST 23, 1985,
AND SR 90, 4TH AVE. S. TO AIRPORT WAY S.,
SHEETS 1 THRU 6 OF 6 SHEETS,
APPROVED AND ADOPTED MAY 27, 2005.
I ~VC----t-'C"'T~
THIS PLAN SUPERSEDES SR 519, EASTBOUND:
KINGDOME VICINITY AND SR 90 CONNECTION,
SHEETS 1 THRU 4 OF 4 SHEETS,
APPROVED SEPOINTEMBER 4, 1998.

ACCESS FEATURES APPROVED,
AFTER SECURING HEARING WAIVER
FROM PARCEL NO. 1-15950, BY
STATE DESIGN ENGINEER
ON MARCH 14, 2001.
SE 1/4 SE 1/4
I 16 8
I ~ ~------------+'-----i--h:
I ,'l~~:-J~----+:---+-=::-::-=--:-=-=:~-=-=­
ACCESS AND USE FOR PARCEL 1-15950 WILL BE PERMITTED AS CLEARANCES
PERMIT ACROSS BRIDGE PIER FOUNDATIONS ON THE EB90 LINE SURVEY AS
SHOWN ON THIS PLAN FROM STA. EB90 16+47.99 TO STA. EB90 22+13.85.

METRO EMPLOYEES ARE ALLOWED ACCESS UNDER THE EB90 LINE STRUCTURE
ON LT. BETWEEEN STA. EB90 15+13.04 AND STA. EB90 22+35 ACCESSED FROM 4TH AVE S BE~EN STA. 4TH AVE 74+38.80 AND STA. 4TH AVE 75+38.80.
I 14
LIMITED ACCESS FEATURES SHOWN
ARE TENTATIVELY APPROVED BY THE
RIGHT OF WAY PLANS MANAGER.
SR 519 13 4TH AVE. S. TO 1ST AVE. S.
KING COUNTY 12
RIGHT OF WAY AND LIMITED ACCESS PLAN
FULL CONTROL
STATION EB90 15+13.04 TO STATION EB90 24+21.71
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON

AIR SPACE CORRIDOR:
THE STATE SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT OF ACCESS UNDER THE STRUCTURE
BETWEEN STA. EB90 15+13.04 AND STA. EB90 23+82.27, RT. & LT. TO
CONSTRUCT, INSPECT, MAINTAIN & REPAIR THE STRUCTURE
APPURTENANCES AND/OR RIGHT OF WAY FROM GROUND LEVEL.
FOR ADDITIONAL SURVEY INFORMATION
SEE RECORD OF SURVEY FILED UNDER
AFN 20110322900005, RECORDS OF
KING COUNTY '2: -­ 7
RETAINED FILL

ACCESS NOTES:
LEGEND --1 -­ I
I --­
I 3 $ /I
I
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS --­ :v //
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS - - _ ~' ~9Q 2 4TH AVE 4 ~-0'<1. <o• 79+41.12 \ (118.21'LT.) <:{',, 'v
L_ - - - - ­ 4 4TH AVE 78+00 ""< ~ /
SW 1/4 SW 1/4 / 7 /?., ~ 128 8 65, ~ "' : -~~-­ "'" 3 - 1
I­

6 9;----­ "1 :c 2 ui ui . '(0------­ ~ ~or~------------------L__________ : ~ ',
T--,------------------------------­ --­ 1., ,;6sgJ' ~~ : : 1:) ~ 1Ao..Q''?,O" e, : \
FOR R/W AND LIA EASTERLY SEE
SR 90, 4TH AVE. S. TO AIRPORT WAY S,
SHEETS 1 THRU 6 OF 6 SHEETS,
APPROVED AND ADOPTED MAY 27, 2005. ~-­ ' \
I +--­ '~ :::J
I - S.­ ROYAL BROUGHAM WAY- -
I 3
I

4TH AVE 82+50.10 A.P. --v~z '
LIMIT OF PLAN
STA. EB90 26+45.94=
SR 90 STA. EB-82 26+72.35 (0.38' RT.) iI '-!_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _I_____ _J_ : ------:---------------------------­ : 11 : w ', 5
SEE 100.03(7) Last Bullet
EXAMPLE 1-14
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR" 1'i "' "' ::;;~ 0.. ~ 200 0 ~~ ~~I-----~------------~-----,-------.------.-------.-----, ~"' " "1 1-----+--------------+---------1--------.-------.-------.-----,
EB90 15+25. 55

EB90 16+05.05 (51.18' RT.)
PROJECT ENGINEER !1-----+--------------+----------1-------+--------t-------;------, ~ml-----+--------------+----------1-------+--------t-------;------, ~j 1-----+--------------+---------1--------.-------------.-----,
NI"
PARCEL NO.
NAME
TOTAL AREA
R/W
LT. REMAINDER RT.
EASM'T ~m1-----+--------------+------~-----~-----------------, r-- 1ii
OWNERSHI p s

WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
DATE SIGNED BY
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
SHEET '" ~
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
OF
SHEETS 3 6 ~ 0 L!:R~E~C~O~RD~S:::....::U~N~L~ES~S!...::O~T~H~ER~~:.:.::S~E~N~O~T~E~D~._ _ _ _....:::..:....::.:...:.=:.:...:.:::.:...:.::.:....=:....._ _ _~F~E~E~T~U~N~L~E~SS:::....::O~T~H~E~R~::.::.::S~E;..:.:NO~T~E~D~.--..L.---------------------------.L...~R~e~ra~ra~n~ce::....J....~A~pp~ro~v~a~I.J..._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~R~ev~is=io~n~D~e~s~cr~ip~tio~n:....._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _....L,....;;BY._.__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-;:;;~-;:;:--;=;;::--;;.;;;;:~:=-;:~~"""'i''ii'";::-;:;;,.;;;:;;:-:;:,t
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER

~ w
LI.. u::
I 17 16 ' \ - - ~ ,.._ 0 \ I - I
ID f-­
I\) 0::: ti) - ~ ....... 0 w 7 0:::
I - (Q)~ ~~~~ :::J
I­ :::J u..
N 00 0 312+58.89 P.O.T. -------~-----11 0 z &._
SEC. 17 0 c::
I

t-----------r--i----------Jt- ,~ r-----1,---- - - ­ - ~ ­ 318+84.06 P.O.T. ----. - - - -
J :1 : ' . . . . . . . . . 1·. . . . . . . . . . . . •. :
NE COR
SW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 17
BLDG. :I '-----JI_ - - - - , :
I :
N 89'59'17" - -! I __ _ _E_1,344.23' _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ----L.;,~-------­ 386.84' l' 320+89± (200' LT.) 317+77± (393.22 RT.) :I i
SE 1/4 SE 1/4
PROJECT SITE
PARCEL 3-10215

I
LU :
LU :1 <( :C ..........................,,,,,,,,.,.~ i1­ 657.26' :
II c 3-10215 ) 500 1000
SCALE IN FEET
VICINITY MAP 'I
I: >
I:
II : 319+14± (504.97 RT.) r-­ -------­ =I
SEC. 17

321+49± (200' LT.)
SECOR
NE 1/4 SE 1/4 -t---- __,___
PROPERTY BOUNDARIES CALCULATED FROM FIELD SURVEYS PERFORMED
BY DAVID EVANS AND ASSOCIATES, INC. PARCEL 3-10215 WAS
CALCULATED USING THE TITLE REPORT PREPARED BY TICOR TITLE
COMPANY OF WASHINGTON, FILE NUMBER 3095489-2, EFFECTIVE DATE
SEPTEMBER 14, 2006. ~ ~
I ;:;; fV'I - ~ 328+79± (200 LT.)
ALL PLANS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE.
OWNERSHIP SHOULD BE VERIFIED.
PROPOSED PROPERTY RIGHTS SHOWN
MAY NOT HAVE BEEN ACQUIRED.
ENCUMBRANCES MAY OR MAY NOT BE
SHOWN. PARTIES SEEKING CURRENT
PLAN INFORMATION SHOULD CONSULT
THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
HEADQUARTERS RIGHT OF WAY PLANS
OFFICE FOR THE OFFICIAL PLAN ON FILE.
FOR ENCUMBRANCE INFORMATION CONSULT
HEADQUARTERS REAL ESTATE SERVICES OFFICE.

SR 167
PARCEL ACQUISITION PLAN
PIERCE COUNTY
PARCEL 1-10215
SEE 100.06
I
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION w _J
OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON 0.. ::;; ~ ::;; 0.. 0.. 1'i "' "' ::;;~ '
SE COR.
SW 1/4 SE 1/4
SEC. 17

EXAMPLE 1-15 17 ,16 ' 0.. ~ 20 21 (...___- _ _,)
DIGITALLY APPROVED BY
ENGINEER OF RECORD
ON "MONTH DAY, YEAR" 0 8~
LEGEND ~~ 1-------,-------------~-------,--------r--------,-------.----------, " "1 1 - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - + - - - - - - t - - - - - - - ; - - - - - - - r - - - - - - - - - - , 0"'
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS !1-----+------------+-------+-----+-------;--------i----------, ~ml-----+------------+-------+-----+-------;--------t----------, o 3-10215
DURIS, ET AL. 704,382 272,165 432,217 r-- 1ii ~
N3 1-------+-~----------+--------t-------t-------------r----------, ~ ~ ,__P_AR_C_E_L_N_O_-~_ _ _ _ _
N_AM_E _ _ _ _ _~_TO_T_A_L_A_R_E_A~_ _R_NJ _ _~_ _ _
LT_._R_EM_A_I_ND_E_R_R_T._ _~_ _E_A_SM_'_T_

~3 0 .....................
PROPERTY LINES
OWNERSHI p s _,
WHENEVER POSSIBLE, LEAVE THIS
SPACE EMPTY FOR REVISION BLOCK
PROJECT ENGINEER
DATE SIGNED BY
STATE SURVEY MANAGER
APPROVED AND ADOPTED
O

100 200
TOTAL AREA IS FROM ASSESSOR'S
ALL AREAS ARE SHOWN IN SQUARE
SHEET 1
OF 1
SHEET ~R!;:EC;:::0:'.,'.R~D~S~U:'.!N:!!L;,;;E~SS::_:0:.:_T.:::H!;:ER~Wl~S::;.E.,!N:;0:.:,T,:;:ED~-------=::....::....:..:...:::..=:.:_:.:::..:_.:.:.::........:=----_:_F,:;;:EE~T~U::::NL:;:;E;::S:::,S_:0::,:T~H:.:;;E:.:.RWl::.::.::S:,:;;E_:N.::.::0::.:T.,:;;E,:;:,D;,_._ _L__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _s_c_A_L_E_1_N_F_E_E_T_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-1.._.:.:R::::efe::::r::::en~c:::.e---1.__::A:t:1PP:::;ro~v.:::al'--,J,._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ____:.R:::ev,;,;:is:::;iO::,;n..,:D::,:e::;sc:::;ri.:;Pl::::iO::.n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _----1.--=.BY....._.'--_ _ _ _ _ _ _---;::-;';::~;:--;:;-;:::---;-;-;;:-;:7'"'.;::;';:';:7;:;-;:::'--;:::';';"";:::--;:-;;-;';";;~;::;"
RIGHT OF WAY OFFICE FILE NUMBER LEGEND
T.24N. R.4E. W.M.
ACCESS TO BE PROHIBITED SHOWN THUS /////////
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP NUMBERS

(~--~)
CITY OF SEATTLE STREET INTERSECTION COORD. SYSTEM
INTERSECTION 4TH AVE 74+89.97
EB 15+93.32 AP. .....................
PROPERTY LINES 50 0
NORTHING [FT] 218,914.117 218,934.997
EASTING [FT] 1,271,354.388 1,270,315.003
SCALE IN FEET 4TH AVE 77+80.06 (119.95'LT.) ' \r ­ - - - - - - -( , 8
I w
END OF PLAN
STA. EB 17+73.52 P.O.T.
MP 0.24

~
I c,j
SEC. 6 9 9
I 10 11 11 --­ --­ -- - -­ --­ - - ­ __ _._; ~;~;_