 can cause the project to turn out differently than planned. Attempting to revise estimates for the analysis outside this framework can make it difficult to disentangle effects and make the management of risks less effective.
Identification and quantification of risk events will provide the project team with knowledge regarding identified risk events. The Project Manager must decide what action to take in response to the identified risks: avoid, transfer, mitigate, or accept the risk. Decisions regarding risk management may affect project budget and schedule. 1 “The human element introduces an additional layer of complexity into the risk process, with a multitude of influences both explicit and covert. These act as sources of bias…which affect every aspect of risk management.” Understanding and
Managing Risk Attitude by Hillson and Murray-Webster. In our processes, we attempt to “condition” (prepare) participants to be aware of bias and make efforts to avoid and reduce bias in workshop inputs.
Page A-8
WSDOT Project Risk Management CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A &
A-1.8
Preparing the Project Team – Procedures &
It is important that the project team be prepared both before and during the upcoming meetings. They should review the following steps, which are needed to complete the cost risk analysis: 1. %Emphasize the “Statement of Purpose” to workshop participants. 2. %Set up a prep meeting (ideally held a few weeks prior to the workshop). a. %Contact the project lead and arrange a visit to the project site for workshop participants who may not know the project. This can occur any time before the workshop. Discuss the significant risks faced by the team. b. %Send the Project Manager an example of a project flowchart from a recent project. Contact the Project Manager to let them know that a project flowchart will need to be completed by the end of the prep meeting. c. %The flowchart is less detailed than a project schedule and needs to show the sequence and duration of major project activities; the flowchart depicts the assumed project delivery strategy. 3. %The Cost Lead reviews the basis for the estimate of project cost and schedule durations, and discusses it with the project team member(s) who prepared and/or compiled the estimate. 4. %At the prep meeting, remind the project team to work up initial lists of “risks to the project”—both threats and opportunities—that have the potential to cause the project cost/schedule to be significantly and measurably different than planned. 5. %Inform participants that it is okay to have outcomes significantly different from what was planned—as long as they are plausible. At a very early stage of design, the divergence from planned values is expected to be greater.
A-1.9

Preparing Subject Matter Experts – Procedures
Proper preparation of subject matter experts and the risk elicitor is required to reduce the bias in expert response. Three biases (described below) tend to dominate in expert response: “anchoring and adjustment bias,” “availability bias,” and “representativeness bias.” These were all researched and documented in the 1970s by Kahneman and
Tversky2 and further refined by others. The biases tend to work in the direction of understating the range of uncertainty. 2 "Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases" Tversky & Kahneman, 1974
WSDOT Project Risk Management
Page A-9 CRA-CEVP® Workshops &
A-1.9.1
Section A
Anchoring and Adjustment Bias
The anchoring and adjustment bias is the phenomenon of experts thinking they know more than they actually do. If you ask an expert for their best guess first, then they will tend to provide inadequate ranges. Following are better ways to reduce biased answers: 1. %Ask experts for the limits of the potential ranges first. 2. %When providing extremes, experts should be able to describe the type of outcome that will generate the extreme case. 3. %Ask the expert for a “plausible low” and “plausible high.” These can be treated in a variety of ways by the analyst who quantifies the risk. A standard needs to be established. a. %One method is to ask the expert for a plausible minimum and plausible maximum. b. %Another method is to ask the expert for a low and high percentile (i.e., 10% and 90%), and then use this information to generate the distribution. c. %A third method is to request another low and high percentile that the expert wishes to provide. 4. %After obtaining the highs and lows, ask for the expert’s most likely value.
A Note on Risk Identification and Assessment
Consider: Sometimes, those new to risk analysis claim it is nothing more than guessing.
However, this view does not represent the actuality that assigning values for probability and impact relies on the expertise and professional judgment of experienced participants. The determination of a value for the probability of occurrence and its consequence to project objectives, if it occurs, is a new activity for many people, and can seem strange at first.
In any field, with experience, professionals develop intuition and an ability to understand projects to a greater degree than those not involved with project development and delivery in their industry. This experience and intuition is extremely valuable—in a risk workshop forum we surround ourselves with “wise counsel” to seriously and thoroughly discuss the project. It might be helpful to examine the word “guess” and compare it to other words, such as “discernment” and “judgment,” that more appropriately describe risk assessment (see Exhibit 3-1 in Part 1 for the definitions and synonyms).

Page A-10
WSDOT Project Risk Management CRA-CEVP® Workshops
A-1.9.2
Availability Bias $
Experts are always receiving new information to add to their knowledge base.
Frequently, when approached for their judgment, experts will have recent information that they have not had time to “blend-in” to their knowledge base.
One practical way to address this information availability bias is to ask the expert a simple follow-up question regarding the issue being elicited: “Is there recent information you are using to provide your judgment?” If the answer is yes, then ask, “How does that new information weigh in relative to all the other information you have accumulated over the years?” If the availability bias exists here, the expert will often say something like, “That’s a good question; let me think about it and get back to you” or “I’ve thought about it and I have given the new information the proper weighting.”
A-1.9.3
Representativeness or Stereotyping Bias
This is the case where experts have base information, but don’t use it. Instead, they match an event with a stereotypical case. Biases, in expert response, can potentially lead to understating the range, so it is important that the risk elicitor properly prepare participants, and monitor and question participants if a bias is detected.
A-1.10 Conflict Resolution
Although uncommon, there may be situations where a significant difference of opinion has arisen between workshop participants, either during or following the workshop.
There are many resources and references on the topic of conflict management and conflict resolution. This workshop guide is not a substitute for those resources, many of which can be found at libraries and bookstores. However, a progressive process for resolving such disagreements at workshops is offered below: 1. Capture the difference as a range
One benefit of the CRA/CEVP® workshop process is that it allows input in the form of ranges and percent probabilities. Usually, the ability to capture input in ranges meets the needs of participants offering input. For example, if one participant states, “This risk event could cause $1 million in additional cost…,” and another says, “This risk event could cause up to $3 million in additional cost…,” we can simply offer to capture the risk with a $1 million to $3 million impact range. Typically, this will satisfy the parties with differing opinions about the impact. (Note: Persons offering opinions should be able to state why they have the opinion and document the information used to develop the opinion.) 2. Evaluate different scenarios
If we are not able to resolve the difference by capturing it as a range, in some cases it may be appropriate to evaluate additional scenarios that address the different opinions being offered. This is practical in some cases—to a point. Having too many scenarios can add cost and complexity to the workshop and may not be necessary or helpful to the overall evaluation of the project.
WSDOT Project Risk Management

Page A-11 CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A 3. Meet with relevant parties and review the data
If a strong difference of opinion persists, and the first two options above will not resolve the matter, agree to gather data and meet to review and discuss the matter with the relevant parties and subject matter experts. Strive to use objective data, with guidance from the Risk Lead and Cost Lead, to reach an agreed-upon input. If, after a concerted effort to reach a consensus decision, disagreement still exists, it may be necessary to adopt a solution and document the dissenting opinion in the report.
When evaluating information, consider the following:
Less Reliable (less certain)
One or very few observations
Anecdote or case study
Unpublished
Unrepeated
Dissimilar projects
No constraints or assumptions identified
No comparative explanation of information

More reliable (more certain)
Many observations
Scientific study
Published and peer-reviewed
Results have been reproduced
Similar projects
Constraints and assumptions listed
Comparative analysis provided
Thompson, Kimberly M., Risk In Perspective, with edits.
A-2

Workshop
The workshop will be attended by project team members, the cost risk team, and necessary SMEs and/or project specialists.
The overall workshop objectives are: 1. Review and validate base cost estimates. 2. Identify uncertainties and risks. 3. Characterize uncertainties and risk (in terms of likelihood and impacts).
A-3
Workshop Activities
A-3.1
Elicitation (Characterizing Risk and Uncertainty)
Eliciting information from SMEs and project team participants is a vital part of the process. Risks are treated as events defined by both cause and outcome. A positive outcome presents an opportunity, while a negative outcome poses a threat to project objectives. Elicited information is recorded into a risk register for the project and becomes input for the Monte Carlo modeling. The risk register lists all identified risk events (both threats and opportunities), with appropriate detail describing the risk event. The risk register should be comprehensive and must be reviewed to ensure that all risks and uncertainties have been quantified and that there is no double-counting of risk events.
Page A-12
WSDOT Project Risk Management

CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A &
Risk Event Properties • %Likelihood (probability of occurrence) • %Consequences (impact to cost/schedule relative to the base estimate if the event occurs) • %Relationship with other events (independent versus correlated with other events)
Nature of Event Occurrence • %Frequency of occurrence • %Number of occurrences during the project • %Number of potential outcomes (consequences) • %Event is independent or correlated with other events or among project activities
Consequences of Event Occurrence to Project Objectives • %Defined in terms of cost impacts, schedule impacts, or both • %Uncertainty in event outcome
Elicitation3 can be accomplished in a number of ways and may utilize any one or a combination of the following approaches: • %In the workshop • %Through a questionnaire • %Through interviews of individuals or small groups in advance of the workshop • %By teleconferencing • %Other methods
Preparation for elicitation provides: • %Base estimate and schedule (including the Basis of Estimate) • %Document of assumptions as a basis for risk assessment • %List of base uncertainties
Elicitor guidance provides: • %Balance in participants’ perspectives (watch for bias in responses) • %Formal elicitation • %Facilitated brainstorming
List and discuss all credible ideas o Assess consequences for likelihood and impact (frequency/magnitude) o Combine similar risks into one well-defined risk with a comprehensive description o 3
Elicit – To draw forth…; to bring out… from the data in which they are implied. To extract, draw out (information) from a person…
WSDOT Project Risk Management

Page A-13 CRA-CEVP® Workshops & o
Section A “Weed-out” smaller, less significant risks that do not warrant inclusion in a formal quantitative analysis; these can be summarized into a “watch-list” for the project team • %Guidance on:
Anchoring (see Preparing Workshop Participants) o Worst- and best-case scenarios for consequences o
A-3.1.1
Elicitation of Subgroups
Rather than having everyone attend every elicitation session, subgroups can in some cases provide a more efficient and effective approach to help ensure a properly focused elicitation with the correct SMEs present. This approach can help keep the number of individuals in the meeting to a manageable size. Group dynamics may begin to deteriorate after a group reaches a certain large size (i.e., many contributions but not necessarily from knowledgeable participants), and subdividing the elicitation provides a practical offset to the size problem. The subdivision of elicitation can happen on the same day, which could allow each of the Risk Leads to take a group into a separate room for elicitation.
The following elicitation subgroups have been used: 1. %Right of Way, Utilities, and Railroad 2. %Environmental, Cultural Resources, Stormwater 3. %Structures, Geotech 4. %All Other: Design, Traffic, Work Zone Traffic Control, Constructability (staging/ sequencing), scope issues/uncertainties, public pressures/opposition, local jurisdiction concerns, local market conditions/uncertainties, uncertainty in the base, management and other costs.
A-3.2
Cautionary Notes Regarding Workshop Dynamics 1. %The size of the group needs to be kept manageable. Group dynamics deteriorates beyond a certain-sized group. While a good mix of expert input is desired, care needs to be taken that the number of participants does not overwhelm the process or diminish the effectiveness of the workshops. For example, too many people in the room attempting to speak can “drown out” or dominate time that should be used to listen to the SMEs. 2. %Participants who are not familiar with the workshop process and/or risk-based estimating need to be educated/acclimated to the process. Participants should know their roles and what will be expected from them during the workshop. 3. %The workshop effort should be commensurate to project size and complexity.
Choose the right size and approach for the project. The process is scalable.

Page A-14
WSDOT Project Risk Management CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A & 4. %The workshop environment itself should be large and comfortable. Workshop participants will be working together for several days; it is best not to have venues that are too small or confining. 5. %Biases in expert response, and failures to characterize distributions and dependencies, can result in understatement of the tails of the distribution. Elicitors need to be well informed on the biases and have experience in reducing them. 6. %Be careful of “discrete” thinking. The risks being quantified are schedule and cost.
These are conceptually continuous random variables and can be modeled as such.
However, likelihoods are properly modeled using a discrete distribution as discussed under “Distributions to Consider for Quantifying Risk,” in Section G, Technical Notes for Risk Modelers. 7. %For some specific events, discrete probabilities are appropriate.
A-3.3
Report Preparation
The workshop report documents the results and process followed; the report is built in service of and to support the project team’s risk management and project delivery efforts. Report preparation is a collaborative effort primarily between the project team and the cost risk team, with final control of editing and publishing the report resting in the hands of the Project Manager. Exhibit A-4 provides a guide/checklist for report writing and Exhibit A-5 provides a flow chart.
A-3.3.1
Draft Report

The draft report is due two weeks after the workshop (or after the final inputs document has been provided to the risk modeler). Every attempt should be made to provide inputs by the final day of the workshop. Allow one week for comments.
A-3.3.2
Workshop Report (Final)
The final report (see Exhibit A-6) is due two weeks after the draft report is delivered (one week after comments are due). This report should be ready and complete with the one-pager and Risk Management Plan spreadsheet. If no comments are received for the draft report, the draft report becomes the workshop report of record.
WSDOT Project Risk Management
Page A-15 CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A
Exhibit A-4 Workshop Report Guide/Checklist
Project Manager/Project Team
The Project Manager and project team actively participate in the review and editing of the report. They own the results and use them in their management system, including communication of results.
1 An accurate and complete workshop request form
1 Project photo for cover
1 Cost and schedule estimates and a brief written summary describing their preparation
1 Reconciliation of differences from previous estimates
Subject Matter Experts
Make notes during the workshop to provide for the report-writing efforts.
1 Key risks
1 Possible response strategies
Risk Lead
Make notes of key discussion topics during the workshop that may be helpful during report preparation, review, and editing. Works closely with the project team and Cost Lead to ensure the report is useful and understandable to the project team. Document the model logic and steps taken to ensure a sound and objective analysis. Clearly identify “candidates for mitigation” and potential response strategies.
Prepare/assemble a written draft of the report:
1 Foreword
1 One-Pager
1 Executive Summary
1 Chapter 1: Overview (project summary/project objectives/workshop objectives/methodology)
1 Chapter 2: Project Description (scenario(s)/flowchart(s)/assumptions/exclusions/notes)
1 Chapter 3: Base Review (base cost and schedule estimate review and validation)
1 Appendix A – Attendees
1 Appendix B – Base Cost Estimate
1 Appendix C – Inputs
1 Appendix D – Outputs
1 Glossary
1 Double-check report for clear and easy-to-understand language
1 Check against QA/QC checklist
1 Bring report to final ready condition with edits in a timely manner.
Cost Lead
Makes notes to aid in writing the estimate validation.
1 Written overview of cost and schedule estimates
1 Written overview of the actions taken to review and validate cost and schedule for the report
Workshop Coordinator from CREM Unit
The workshop report is reviewed against the cost and risk quality control checklist.
1 Review QA/QC checklist
1 Work with project team and cost-risk team through completion of report
1 Obtain final copy from Project Manager for the file

Note: It is recommended that a designated “report editor/coordinator” be identified prior to the workshop. The Project Manager can work with the CREM Unit to help determine who might serve in this role. The report editor/coordinator might be someone from the project team’s communication office, the cost-risk team, or other appropriate position.
Page A-16
WSDOT Project Risk Management CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A
Exhibit A-5 Report Writing Responsibility
PROJECT TEAM/PROJECT MANAGER (edit/publish authority)
Actively participate in the review and editing of the report. Own the results and use them in their management system –including communication of results and publishing the results, including “one-pager” on project website.
START
Project Team Identifies
Need for Workshop and
Submits Workshop
Request Form

Report Editor
Coordinator
CREM Office q QA/QC Checklist Review q Insure report completion q Final copy for records
Risk Lead
Cost Lead q Prepare Draft q Easy to read language q Check QA/QC Checklist q Review cost/schedule q Validate cost/schedule q Write validation for report
Subject Matter Experts q Make notes q Key Risks q Potential mitigation
Cost Estimate Validation Process
Specialists who work to serve the project team
WSDOT Project Risk Management
Page A-17 &

CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A
Exhibit A-6 Workshop Report
Responsible Party
Project Team
Members
Subject Matter
Experts
Risk Lead
Cost Lead
CREM Unit
Workshop
Coordinator

Responsibilities
The project team, just as they did before the workshop, owns the Project
Management Plan, and all project development and delivery responsibilities. This includes all project cost and schedule estimates and the Risk Management Plan.
The project team owns the report for their use in aiding and assisting their risk management and project management activities.
During the workshop process, the SMEs are responsible for their opinions and objective advice offered during the workshop and report preparation.
The Risk Lead is responsible for preparing workshop participants and for conducting the risk elicitation. The Risk Lead is responsible for the modeling, analysis, and conclusions to be drawn from the analysis. The Risk Lead is also responsible for writing their portion of the report. Uses a quality control (QC) checklist as a guide to ensure an effective workshop experience that results in a sound and objective analysis of project costs, schedules, and risks. Clearly identifies “candidates for mitigation” and possible strategies for mitigating these key risks.
The Cost Lead is responsible for reviewing and validating the project cost estimate and schedule. The Cost Lead is also responsible for preparing their portion of the report.
The workshop coordinator is responsible for ensuring the appropriate participants are in attendance at the appropriate times. In addition, the review of the report against the QC checklist will be performed by the workshop coordinator or others in the CREM office.
CEVP® Results and Capital Budget Development Data Needs
A-3.5

Required
Data
In order to load agency management systems and provide budget information, specific data needs to be provided to the region program management offices. This data is then loaded in to the Capital Program Management System (CPMS) and transferred to the
Transportation Executive Information System (TEIS) for use in gaining budget approval.
A-3.6
Project Schedule Data Milestone Dates
Project Estimated Cost Data
Begin Preliminary Engineering
Begin Right of Way Acquisition Phase
Advertisement Date
Operationally Complete Date

Design Cost Estimate
Right of Way Cost Estimate
Construction Cost Estimate
Management Endorsement
Along with the data provided by the project team, agency management endorses which costs are to be used and the schedule to be assumed. Guidance on use and reporting of
CEVP®/CRA results and CPMS data requirements is provided in Executive Order E1053 posted at: 8 https://wwwi.wsdot.wa.gov/publications/policies/fulltext/1053.pdf.pdf
Page A-18
WSDOT Project Risk Management CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A
A-4

QA/QC: All Have a Role
A-4.1
Prior to the Workshop
The project team, Project Manager, appropriate specialty groups, and appropriate stakeholders must perform a reasonability check on materials developed prior to the workshop. The Cost and Risk QC checklist provided in Exhibit A-7 should be used by the
Project Manager to ensure the project team is ready for the workshop. When the workshop is convened, most attendees should already be familiar with, and have had an opportunity to comment on, the scope, schedule, and cost estimate that the project team has developed. The scope, schedule, and cost estimate will be the subject of review and analysis at the CRA or CEVP® workshop. At the discretion of the CREM Unit, region Risk Manager, or the Project Manager, the workshop may be postponed if the cost and risk quality control checklist items are not all satisfactorily completed.
Exhibit A-7 Cost and Risk QC Checklist
Cost and Risk Quality Control Checklist
Cost Lead Review 1 1 The “Basis of Estimate” has been completed. 2 1 All project team backup available has been reviewed and incorporated. 3 1 The estimate scope has been validated with the CEVP® workshop scope. 4 1 All unit costs have been validated by professional judgment and/or historical cost information. 5 1 All spreadsheet formulas have been reviewed and totals have been cross-checked. 6 1 All costs and durations have been allocated to flowchart activities. 7 1 Contingencies have been sufficiently removed from the base cost estimate and the inclusion in the risk estimate has been verified. 8 1 All design allowances have been validated; allowances with large variation have been transferred to the risk estimate. 9 1 All markup amounts have been verified and confirmed appropriate. 10 1 All estimate assumptions and clarifications have been documented. 11 1 Base uncertainty has been assessed and documented.
Risk Lead Review 1 1 The workshop process has been presented to the workshop team. 2 1 Project team issues and concerns have all been explored. 3 1 Consensus on initial risk identification list has been achieved. 4 1 The focus is on key risks. Minor issues have been filtered out by consistent screening criteria. 5 1 Remaining risks (threats and opportunities) are quantified in terms of likelihood and consequences. 6 1 Potential risk mitigation measures have been captured. 7 1 Contingencies and allowances have been coordinated with the cost team. 8 1 Cost Lead has verified that risks are not included in the base cost estimate (no double counting). 9 1 All issues, impacts, likelihoods, and mitigation measures are documented consistently. 10 1 All assumptions and clarifications have been documented. 11 1 Team consensus has been reached on all risk items. 12 1 All risk estimate backup has been documented (date, page number, and estimator’s name).
WSDOT Project Risk Management

Page A-19 CRA-CEVP® Workshops &
A-4.2
Section A
During and After the Workshop 1. %The Project Manager, appropriate project team members, and specialty groups perform a reasonability check on the preliminary draft results, including charts. 2. %The project team, Risk Lead, and Cost Lead work together to deliver useful products that can improve project control through managing project cost and schedule risks.
All members are equally important and must work cooperatively to achieve this objective. 3. %Risk and cost elicitors coordinate and assist each other to make sure information is properly defined and coordinated during the workshop. 4. %The modelers must carefully review the model to ensure the information from the workshop is properly represented. The model logic must be described in the report, and the results presented to the project team and the CREM Unit. 5. %Throughout the analysis, the risk elicitor works with the project team, WSDOT subject matter experts (SMEs), and external SMEs to make certain the risk information is correctly captured for use in the analysis. 6. %Throughout the analysis, the Cost Lead works with the project team, WSDOT SMEs, and external SMEs to make certain the cost information is correctly captured for use in the analysis. 7. %The CREM Unit reviews the analysis/report for correctness and clarity; the project team reviews the analysis/report to ensure they understand the results and can confidently discuss them with others.
A-5
Risk Response
Take action in response to identified risks. Following identification and analysis of project risks, Project Managers and project teams must take action in response to the identified project risks, focusing on risks of most significance.
In order to maximize the benefits of project risk management, we must incorporate the project risk management activities into our Project Management Plan and work activities. This means building risk management activities into our Work Breakdown
Structure (WBS). WSDOT has a ready-made WBS in the form of its Master Deliverables
List (MDL) to help ensure our project work plans are comprehensive, consistent, and complete.
Risk response requires effort to develop and implement response actions; we must plan for expending this effort following the results of our risk analysis. See Chapter 5 “Risk
Response” of this document for detailed descriptions of risk response actions.

Page A-20
WSDOT Project Risk Management CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Section A &
Remember… % • %CEVP® is iterative in nature and represents a “snapshot in time” of that project for the known conditions at that point. % • %CEVP® normally deals with identifiable and quantifiable project-type risks (i.e., % those events that can occur in planning, design, bidding, construction, and % changed conditions). % • %CEVP® could also consider the larger, more difficult risks—“acts of God” that % can have very high impact in cost and schedule on large programs—but at this % point, these risks are generally not included. This is an area for review and % development—in particular, how to characterize such events in a useful manner % for better management of the projects. All exclusions and assumptions need to % be clearly documented in the workshop report. %
It is good to remember that risk-based estimating, as in CRA/CEVP® workshops, does not provide an “answer book” with all uncertainty removed from the project. Risk-based estimating and consideration of project uncertainty and project risk does not add costs to a project, it reveals them.
We have to do the best we know how at the moment...; If it doesn't turn out right, we can modify it as we go along. ~ FDR
WSDOT Project Risk Management
Page A-21 CRA-CEVP® Workshops
Page A-22
Section A

Section B
B-1
Manager & Team – Typical Duties &
Description of Work
Project teams typically look to the CRA/CEVP® workshop process as a tool to help improve the accuracy, consistency, and confidence in their project cost and schedule estimates. This process also helps Project Managers and teams with their project risk management efforts, a required component of all Project Management Plans. During this collaborative process, uncertainty within a project is identified and quantified. Project schedules and cost estimates are owned by the project teams. Development of risk-based estimates through the CRA/CEVP® workshop process is a collaborative effort between the project team, experts in cost and risk analysis, and external subject matter experts.
Workshops are usually held early in project development, from late planning to the early stages of developing the contracts plans, specifications, and estimate (PS&E). Risk management is an ongoing project management activity; the Project Manager and project team should continue to proactively manage risk up until advertising the contract. Continuing risk management and risk assessment should look at the knowledge gained through the workshop process, and pay particular attention to evaluating the sequence of construction activities and scheduling through completion of the PS&E.
Exhibit B-1 Timing of Workshops concept
Timing of CRA/CEVP Workshops
Evolution of a project cost estimate from concept to concrete typical estimating methods parametric deterministic concrete
Typical timeframe for CRA/CEVP workshops
Design
Approval

Planning
Scoping
AD
Design/PS&E
Project Risk Management is an ongoing activity. pre-construction
WSDOT Project Risk Management
Project
Development
Final
Construction
Cost

Contractor Risk Planning and Management construction
Page B-1 Project Manager & Project Team – Duties
Section B
Project schedules and cost estimates are owned by the project teams, and they must be updated regularly. This may involve conducting workshops periodically (typically, every one to two years). The workshop effort begins with a request from the project team. The process focuses on the project team for input of primary information; the project team utilizes the workshop results as they deem appropriate, to more effectively manage their projects. The two main elements of an estimate are: base cost, which represents the cost if the project materializes as planned, and risk events, a combination of the probability of an uncertain event and its consequences. A positive consequence presents an opportunity; a negative consequence poses a threat. Note that risk events are separate from variability that is inherent in the base.
B-2
CEVP®
Generally, CEVP® follows the seven-step process outlined below: 1. Select the Project and Method 2. Structure the Project Team Effort 3. Define and Evaluate the Base Cost Estimate and Schedule 4. Assess Uncertainty and Risk 5. Quantify Uncertainty in the Project Cost and Schedule 6. Conduct Probabilistic Analysis and Documentation 7. Implement and Measure Risk Response Actions, Monitor and Control
After the probabilistic analysis is complete, the results are then interpreted, documented, and reported to the project team. Standard results include total project cost and schedule distributions, both in terms of current dollars and year of expenditure dollars. The resulting distributions, or ranges, have specific probability characteristics and are reported as percentage values.
Statement of Purpose for CRA/CEVP® Workshops
B-2.1

The purpose of the workshops is to: (1) provide the Project Manager and project team with actionable information that can be used to shift the odds in favor of project success, and (2) provide a useful, sound, and objective analysis and report that the project team will own and act upon to improve, as well as to validate and confirm, their project cost and schedule.
The project risk management performance can be measured by comparing “pre-mitigated” to “post-mitigated” results, then identifying risk responses to ascertain the amount of risk relief to be accomplished through risk management efforts.
The process provides a tool for the project team to evaluate the quality and completeness of the current project estimate. It is intended to increase confidence in the project cost and schedule forecasts and to identify areas of uncertainty.
The workshop process is not intended to “recreate the wheel,” or second-guess the project team. It is not a substitute for other necessary project management functions such as project control and value engineering.
Page B-2
WSDOT Project Risk Management Section B &
Project Manager & Project Team – Duties
Typical applications of results are as follows: • • • • • • • •
Presentation of cost estimate range
Project assessment and management
Risk management
Value engineering
Integrated project/program management
Design-build and other applications
Communications
Financial management

Note: Risk-based estimating, such as CRA/CEVP®, does not provide an “answer book” with all uncertainty removed from the project. Probability, not certainty, is the outcome from the workshop process.
The CRA/CEVP® workshop effort is an analysis of data provided by the team in collaboration with subject matter experts and cost and risk experts. It provides useful information for risk management and is an integral part of the overall Project Management Plan. The project team owns the workshop report and results to help them develop a plan of action to respond to the identified risks. The report written from the CEVP® analysis is not a decision document— it is an information document for decision makers.
B-3
Project Team Status Prior to CRA/CEVP® Workshop
The project team must: 1. ( Provide plans and documents that describe the scope, schedule, and cost estimate of the project. The Project Manager needs to approve of the Project Management Plan, including scope, schedule, and cost estimate, prior to the workshop. In addition, all key contributors need to confirm and accept the estimate that is being presented for analysis in the workshop. The information presented by the project team should not be a surprise to the specialty groups and stakeholders involved in the project. 2. ( Describe the level of project maturity (i.e., percentage of design completion). 3. ( Describe the character and time frame of the project and issues of concern.
The Project Manager and project team should remain mindful of the overall workshop objectives, which are to: 1. ( Review and/or validate base cost estimates. 2. ( Identify project uncertainties and elicitation of project risks 3. ( Characterize uncertainties and risk, which are documented in a risk register
WSDOT Project Risk Management
Page B-3 Project Manager & Project Team – Duties &
Section B
To ensure the quality of our workshops and effectively use the participating subject matter experts, the Project Manager and project team do the following: • ( Submit CRA/CEVP® workshop request forms at least 8 weeks prior to the workshop; for some projects, such as SR 520 and AWV, Project Managers have asked that the forms be submitted at least 12 weeks in advance. • ( Submit the following documents 2 weeks prior to the workshop: o Updated Project Management Plan (including Risk Management Plan) o Current project schedule (to be used at the workshop) o Current estimate file (with assumptions and Basis of Estimate) o Current project summary (and detailed project scope)
The items above need to be completed and turned in early so that workshop participants can learn the basic elements of the project, and begin review of cost estimate key items. Project estimate review and risk assessment are the main workshop topics.

B-4
Project Team Responsibilities and Requirements
The project team needs to make available, for the majority of the workshop, key people who can represent the project in areas essential to the project objectives. These includes:
1 Project management (to provide project context and relationship with stakeholders)
1 Engineering (design and construction)
1 Cost estimating
1 Scheduling
1 Environmental (permits, processes, and mitigation)
The Project Manager is to ensure the availability of project team members who can speak to the issues raised in the workshop and are familiar with the documentation.
The project team must be prepared to identify applicable risk elements (global and project specific), the interrelationships of the risks, and the characterization of the risks in terms of likelihood and impacts. If the project team is interested in pricing the project for different delivery methods (e.g., design-bid-build vs design-build), they need to be prepared to discuss this.
The project team, working collaboratively with the workshop team, should be prepared to discuss and determine:
1 Exclusions
1 Funding
1 Programmatic Issues
1 Others
1 Adequate subject matter expert participation
1 Authority to “de-bias” the input
1 The optimal process balance between effort and accuracy; level of analytical detail and how to handle dependence, correlations, and distributions

Page B-4
WSDOT Project Risk Management Section B
Project Manager & Project Team – Duties
1 The probabilistic risk-based integrated cost and schedule modeling needs
1 Global versus project-specific risks and other uncertainties
1 Treatment of base uncertainties
B-4.1
Items Required from the Project Team Prior to the Workshop
The project team must produce the following items ahead of time and have them available at the workshop:
1 Project team organizational chart.
1 Project team contact information.
1 Project vicinity map, informational documents, aerial photos, et al.
1 Project definition documents and design criteria used.
1 Summary or overview of project plan(s) that indicate the project elements at the type, size, and location level. This may include concept plans, cross sections, illustrations, public information documents, memorandums of understanding, geotech info, etc.
1 If there are multiple alternatives, there needs to be a description of status and relationships sufficient to understand the options and to plan the workshop priorities.
1 The Basis of Estimate.
1 Current estimates (unit prices, parametric estimates, combination, etc.), including an overall “project/program rollup estimate.” Note the base year of the estimate.
1 A preliminary listing of risks and the project team’s issues of concern.
1 A preliminary project flowchart showing key tasks and relationships from current status through completion of construction and open to traffic.
1 Current design and construction schedule, including description of how durations were determined and an explanation of the construction sequencing strategy.
1 Estimated durations and costs associated with completion of preliminary engineering:
1 Mapping and surveys
1 Engineering and design
1 Geotechnical investigation
1 Environmental process and permitting
1 Environmental mitigation design (including administrative costs)
1 Hazmat remediation design
1 Structures
1 Hydraulics
1 All other relevant areas for the subject project

WSDOT Project Risk Management
Page B-5 Project Manager & Project Team – Duties
Section B
1 Estimated durations and costs associated with completion of right of way:
1 Real Estate Services
1 Right of way acquisition services (includes administrative costs)
1 Access management
1 Right of way property costs
1 All other relevant areas for the subject project
1 Estimated durations and costs associated with completion of construction:
1 Construction engineering
1 Construction cost of project
1 Lump sum items (weigh station, maintenance facility/equipment, park & ride lot, etc.)
1 Utility relocations
1 Hazmat remediation
1 Environmental mitigation (cost to construct)
1 Allowances for miscellaneous add-ons (lighting, signing, striping, SC&DI, etc.) with explanation as to what items are covered and percentage to be used, and why.
1 All other relevant areas for the subject project.

Page B-6
WSDOT Project Risk Management Section C &
C-1
Risk Lead – Duties &
Description of Work
Risk Leads participate in a peer-level review or due diligence analysis on the scope, schedule, and cost estimate for various projects to evaluate quality and completeness, including anticipated risk and uncertainty in the projected cost and schedule.
The Risk Lead: • %Leads the risk portion of the process, including risk elicitation and project flowchart development1 for modeling. • %Keeps the flowchart practical; it should be a simple but complete representation of the project schedule. It is the ”backbone” of the analysis and can be thought of as an abstract of the project schedule. • %Participates in cost validation or review and risk uncertainty workshops for selected projects. • %Conducts prep sessions, follow-up meetings, or rerun sessions as necessary. • %Provides reports and presentations documenting workshops. • %Provides reports using report guide or table of contents. • %Develops or implements workshops on topics such as project definition and risk i