er. The sprayer shall be readily available to all parts of the deck being overlaid and shall be able to discharge water in a fine mist to prevent accumulation of free water on the deck, and for water-blasting concrete to remove laitance, rust, stains, dust, and loose paste. Sufficient water shall be available to thoroughly soak the deck being overlaid and to keep the deck wet prior to concrete placement.
The Contractor shall certify that the units used meet the requirements in the table below:
Minimum Requirements for Water Delivery
Activity
Water Pressure
Flushing none specified
Misting 2,500 psi
Water Blasting 7,500 psi
Saturating none specified 6-21.3(2)G

Flushing Machine
The finishing machine shall meet the following requirements: 1.
Shall be self-propelled and capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control. 2.
Shall be equipped with augers, followed by an oscillating, vibrating screed, vibrating roller tamper, or a vibrating pan, followed by a rotating cylindrical double drum screed.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 6-317 6-21
Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 3.
Shall have the necessary adjustments to produce the required cross section, line, and grade, including the ability to recreate transverse grade breaks within 6 inches left or right of existing transverse grade breaks. 4.
Shall be capable of raising the screeds, augers, and all other parts of the finishing mechanical operation to clear the screeded surface and return to the specified grade under positive control.

5.
The vibrating screed, roller tamper or pan shall be of sufficient length and width to properly consolidate the mixture. 6.
The vibrating frequency of the vibrating screed, roller tamper or pan shall be variable with positive control. 6-21.3(3)
Submittals
The Contractor shall submit the following Working Drawings in accordance with
Section 1-05.3: 1.
A Type 1 Working Drawing consisting of catalog cuts and operating parameters of the hydro-demolition machine selected by the Contractor, including the locations and proposed Scarification Depths. 2.
A Type 1 Working Drawing consisting of catalog cuts, operating parameters, axle loads, and axle spacing of the rotary milling machine, including the locations and proposed Scarification Depths, if proposed for use on this project. 3.
A Type 2 Working Drawing of the Process Wastewater Containment and Disposal
Plan. The Process Wastewater Containment and Disposal Plan shall describe all provisions for the containment, collection, and disposal of all Process Wastewater and associated contaminants (including runoff water and contaminants escaping through breaks in the bridge deck) generated by all operations.

4.
A Type 2 Working Drawing of the Debris Containment and Disposal Plan. This plan shall describe the methods and materials used to contain, collect, and dispose of all concrete debris generated by all operations, including but not limited to Scarifying,
Type 1 Deck Repair, Type 2 Deck Repair, placing and misting the modified concrete overlay, curing the concrete overlay, sandblasting, water-blasting, and cleaning. The
Working Drawing shall also address provisions for protecting adjacent traffic from flying debris. 5.
A Type 2 Working Drawing of the mix design meeting the requirements of microsilica modified concrete or fly ash modified concrete, and Class M concrete. The
Contractor’s submittal of a mix design shall be on WSDOT Form 350-040 and shall provide a unique identification for each mix design. A unique identification for the mix design is composed of the combination of the Mix Design Number and the Concrete
Plant Number. 6.
A Type 2 Working Drawing of the paving equipment specifications and details of the screed rail support system, including details of anchoring the rails and providing rail continuity. 7.
A Type 2E Working Drawing of the survey data collected as required in Section 6-21.3(4) and a Type 1 Working Drawing of each day’s survey record. 8.
A Type 1 Working Drawing of the measurements documenting the deck repair areas as required by Section 6-21.3(7)B.

6-21.3(4)
Surveying for Scarification and Modified Concrete Overlay
Prior to beginning Scarifying or otherwise removing materials from the Existing Bridge
Deck Surface, the Contractor shall complete a survey of the Existing Bridge Deck Surface to establish the Existing Bridge Deck Surface Model (station, offset, and elevation) to form the basis for the Engineer to create the Idealized Existing Bridge Deck Surface Model
Page 6-318
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21 (station, offset, elevation) and, from that, the Top of Overlay Model (station, offset, and elevation).
The Engineer will provide the Contractor with primary survey control information consisting of descriptions of two primary control points used for the horizontal and vertical control. Primary control points will be described by reference to the bridge or project-specific stationing and elevation datum. The Engineer will also provide horizontal coordinates for the beginning and ending points and for each Point of Intersection (PI) on each centerline alignment included in the project. The Contractor shall provide the
Engineer 21 calendar days’ notice in advance of the Contractor’s scheduled surveying work to allow the Engineer time to provide the primary survey control information.
The Contractor shall verify the primary survey control information furnished by the
Engineer and shall expand the survey control information to include secondary horizontal and vertical control points as needed for the project. The Contractor’s survey records shall include descriptions of all survey control points, including coordinates and elevations of all secondary control points.
The Contractor shall maintain detailed survey records, including a description of the work performed on each shift, the methods utilized to conduct the survey, and the control points used. The record shall be of sufficient detail to allow the survey to be reproduced.
A Type 1 Working Drawing of each day’s survey record shall be provided to the Engineer within 3 working days after the end of the shift. The Contractor shall compile the survey information in an electronic file format acceptable to the Engineer (Excel spreadsheet format is preferred).
Survey information collected by the Contractor to create the Existing Bridge Deck Surface
Model shall include the station, offset, and elevation of every point of intersection on a grid created as follows: 1.

Longitudinally, for the full length of the bridge and extending 100 feet beyond the bridge back of pavement seat on each end. Data shall be gathered every 20 feet, at even 20-foot station intervals, and also at the centerline of each bridge expansion joint. 2.
Transversely, for the full width of the bridge to be overlaid, from curb line to curb line.
Data shall be gathered at every longitudinal station centerline, offset at each lane, offset at all changes in superelevation such as crowns and broken-backs, and offset at each curb line.
When traffic wear, such as wheel rutting, is not centered on and parallel to existing lane lines (e.g., when the lane striping has been shifted or skewed at some point during the bridge history), the Contractor shall orient its surveying centerlines, or select offsets at the former lane lines, so that the survey data consistently picks up the high spots at the former lane lines, and not any low spots in the wheel ruts.
The Contractor shall ensure a surveying accuracy to within ± 0.01 feet for vertical control and ± 0.2 feet for longitudinal and transverse control.
The Engineer will establish the Idealized Existing Bridge Deck Surface Model and the Top of Overlay Model based on the Contractor’s Existing Bridge Deck Surface Model, and will provide both to the Contractor within five Working Days after receiving the Contractor’s survey information.
Except for (1) the primary survey control information, (2) the Idealized Existing Bridge
Deck Surface Model, and (3) the Top of Overlay Model furnished by the Engineer, the
Contractor shall be responsible for all calculations, surveying, and measuring required for setting, maintaining, and resetting equipment and materials necessary for the construction of the overlay to the final grade profile. The Engineer may post-check the Contractor’s surveying, but these post-checks shall not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for internal survey quality control.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 6-319 6-21
Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21.3(5)
Operations on the Bridge Deck
The following apply to all Contractor operations on the bridge deck, including but not limited to Scarification, cleaning concrete surfaces, Type 1 and Type 2 Deck Repair, sandblasting, water-blasting, placing, consolidating, finishing, curing, sawing, and sealing concrete: 1.
The Contractor shall protect adjacent traffic from flying debris in accordance with its Debris containment and disposal plan submitted in accordance with Section 6-21.3(3). 2.
The Contractor shall collect, contain, and dispose of all concrete debris in accordance with its Debris Containment and Disposal Plan submitted in accordance with Section 6-21.3(3). 3.
The Contractor shall collect, contain, and dispose all Process Wastewater in accordance with Sections 5-01.3(11), 6-21.3(6)D, and the Contractor’s Process
Wastewater Containment and Disposal Plan submitted in accordance with Section 6-21.3(3). The Contractor shall comply with applicable regulations concerning such water disposal. Process Wastewater shall not be in-filtrated. 6-21.3(6)
Scarifying Concrete Surface

6-21.3(6)A
Prerequisites to Scarification
Scarifying shall not begin until after the Contractor has completed all the following: 1.
Demonstrated that all Work needed to complete items 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of Section 6-21.3(1) can and will be completed in one and only one construction season. 2.
Submitted all submittals required in Section 6-21.3(3) and addressed all the Engineer’s comments to the satisfaction of the Engineer. 3.
Has received the Idealized Existing Bridge Deck Surface Model and Top of Overlay
Model from the Engineer. 6-21.3(6)B
Restrictions on Scarification Methods
The method used to Scarify the bridge deck from the Existing Bridge Deck Surface down to ½ inch above the Scarification Depth shall be one of the following: 1.
Rotary Milling

2.
Hydro-Demolition 3.
Power Driven Hand Tools
The method used to Scarify the bottom ½ inch of Scarification Depth shall be one of the following: 1.
Hydro-Demolition with rotary heads
The method used for Scarification within 12 inches, horizontally, of existing: bridge expansion joint headers, steel expansion joint assemblies, concrete butt joints between back of pavement seats and bridge approach slabs, bridge drain assemblies, and thriebeam post steel anchorage assemblies fastened to the side or top of the Structure Deck shall be one of the following: 1.
Hydro-Demolition
All areas of the deck that are inaccessible to the selected Scarifying machine shall be
Scarified to remove the concrete surface matrix by a method acceptable to the Engineer.
Page 6-320

2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21.3(6)C 6-21
Scarification Requirements
Prior to Scarification with a rotary milling machine, the Contractor shall verify the depth of the rebar. The Contractor shall conduct rotary milling in such a manner as to avoid snagging rebar.
The Contractor shall Scarify the Existing Bridge Deck to the Scarification Depth and horizontal limits shown in the Plans. Determination of the elevation of the bottom of the
Scarification Depth shall be in accordance with the definition of Scarification Depth in
Section 6-21.1(1).
Dense, sound areas of existing bridge deck concrete that are difficult to remove with hydro-demolition or rotary milling equipment may, with the concurrence of the Engineer, be left in place provided the concrete is Scarified to a depth sufficient to provide a minimum thickness of Modified Concrete Overlay of 1.0 inch when measured from the peaks of the Scarified surface to the Top of Overlay Model. 6-21.3(6)D
Requirements for Rotary Milling
The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements for rotary milling equipment in Section 6-21.3(2)A.
Rotary milling machines shall be operated to Scarify no deeper than the criteria in (1) and (2) below; whichever criteria limits use to the shallowest depth of cut shall control: 1.

½ inch above the Scarification Depth, measured from the Scarification Depth to the deepest cuts of a tooth, or 2.
1.0 inch above the top of rebar, measured between the deepest cuts of a tooth to the top of the shallowest rebar.
Operation of the rotary milling machine shall be continuously monitored to ensure compliance with the requirements of (1) and (2) above.
If the rotary milling machine contacts the structure deck in excess of the Scarification
Depth tolerances provided in Section 6-21.3(2)A, or Scarifies deeper than the limitations on depth of cut in this section, or contacts steel reinforcing bars at any time, the
Contractor shall immediately cease rotary milling and notify the Engineer. Rotary milling shall not resume until completion of the appropriate adjustments to the rotary milling machine and receiving the Engineer’s concurrence to resume. 6-21.3(6)E
Requirements for Hydro-Demolishing
The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements for hydrodemolishing equipment in Section 6-21.3(2)B.
All hydro-demolition that is intended to remove concrete within a ½ inch immediately above the Scarification Depth shall be performed with rotary heads.
The depth of concrete removal with the hydro-demolition machine shall not exceed 2.0 inches in sound concrete in one pass. If the Scarification Depth is less than or equal to 2.0 inches, the hydro-demolition machine shall remove sound concrete to the Scarification
Depth in one pass of the machine, within a tolerance of ±¼ inch. Because this pass includes removal of the ½ inch immediately above the Scarification Depth, the full depth of removal shall be performed with rotary heads.
If the Scarification Depth is greater than 2.0 inches, multiple passes shall be required, with no pass removing greater than 2 inches of sound concrete.
Once the operating parameters of the Hydro-Demolition machine are defined by programming and calibration as specified in Section 6-21.3(2)B, they shall be monitored every 20 feet as the machine progresses across the bridge deck and adjusted as needed to prevent the unnecessary removal of sound concrete below the required Scarification
Depth.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 6-321 6-21
Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash
The Contractor shall maintain a minimum production rate of 250-square feet per hour during the deck Scarifying process.
All water used in the Hydro-Demolition process shall be potable. Stream or lake water will not be permitted.
All bridge drains and other outlets within 100 feet of the Hydro-Demolition machine shall be temporarily plugged during the Hydro-Demolition operation. When Scarifying a bridge deck passing over traffic lanes, the Contractor shall protect the traffic below by restricting and containing Scarifying operations and implementing traffic control measures. 6-21.3(6)F
Scarification Cleanup
After Scarifying is complete to the Scarification Depth and all concrete debris and rubble have been removed - over the entire lane or strip to be overlaid in one operation – the
Contractor shall thoroughly vacuum and wash with high-pressure water the entire surface of all dust, freestanding water, and loose particles, to clean it in preparation for ASTM
D4580 Method B inspection. 6-21.3(7)

Deck Repair 6-21.3(7)A
Classification
Deck repair will be classified as Type 1 Deck Repair or Type 2 Deck Repair. The determination of whether an area will be classified as Type 1 or Type 2 will not be made until after completion of deck repair excavation, repair of steel reinforcing bars, and removal of concrete debris. 6-21.3(7)B
Chain Drag
After the entire lane or strip to be overlaid has been Scarified and cleaned as required in
Section 6-21.3(6), the entire surface shall be inspected by the Contractor, in the presence of the Engineer, in accordance with ASTM D4580, Method B. Based on that inspection, the Contractor shall mark those areas, meeting any of the following criteria, for removal: 1.
Unsound concrete in accordance with ASTM D4580, Method B. 2.
Lack of bond between existing concrete and reinforcing steel. 3.
All existing nonconcrete patches.
After all deck repair excavation is complete, the Contractor shall measure and submit to the Engineer as a Type 1 Working Drawing the location and size of each area identified above by station, offset, length, width, average depth, and deck repair Type, using the form provided by the Engineer. 6-21.3(7)C

Deck Repair Excavation
The areas marked for removal in Section 6-21.3(7)B shall be excavated with equipment as described in Section 6-21.3(2)C, or hydro-demolishing equipment. Excavation shall be to the depth necessary to remove all loose and unsound material, without damaging reinforcing steel or sound concrete.
Care shall be taken in removing the deteriorated material to not damage the existing sound concrete or steel reinforcing bars that are to remain in place. All removal shall be accomplished by making vertical edges at the boundaries of the repair area. In no case shall the depth of a sawn vertical cut exceed ¾ inch or to the top of the top steel reinforcing bars, whichever is less.
Bridge deck areas outside the repair area damaged by the Contractor’s operations shall be repaired by the Contractor at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency, and to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
Page 6-322
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21.3(7)D 6-21
Repair of Steel Reinforcing Bars
Where existing steel reinforcing bars inside deck repair areas show natural deterioration greater than 20-percent section loss, the Contractor shall furnish and place steel reinforcing bars alongside the deteriorated bars in accordance with the details shown in the Standard Plans. Payment for such extra Work will be by force account as provided in
Section 1-09.6.
All reinforcing steel damaged due to the Contractor’s operations shall be repaired by the
Contractor. Damage to rebar shall be understood to include damage to epoxy coating.
The repair shall be as follows or as directed by the Engineer: 1.

Damage to epoxy coating, when present on existing steel reinforcing bars, shall be repaired in accordance with Section 6-02.3(24)H. 2.
Damage to bars resulting in a section loss of 20 percent or more of the bar area shall be repaired by chipping out the adjacent concrete and splicing a new bar of the same size. Concrete shall be removed to provide a ¾-inch minimum clearance around the bars. The splice bars shall extend a minimum of 40 bar diameters beyond each end of the damage. 3.
All bars partially or completely removed from the deck shall have the damaged portions removed and spliced with new bars as outlined in item 2 above.
For bridge decks constructed under the same contract as the concrete overlay, all reinforcing steel damaged due to the Contractor’s operations shall be repaired by the
Contractor at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency.
For bridge decks not constructed under the same Contract as the modified concrete overlay, responsibility for costs to repair damage shall be allocated as follows: 1.
Repairing damage that occurs during hydro-demolition to coatings on existing reinforcing steel that is at or above the Scarification Depth shall be paid for in accordance with Section 1-09.6. 2.
Repairing damage to existing reinforcing steel that is below the Scarification Depth shall be at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. 6-21.3(7)E
Type 1 Deck Repair
An area will be classified as a Type 1 Deck Repair when the completed concrete excavation complies with both of the following: 1.

Concrete excavation extends below the Scarification Depth and 2.
Concrete excavation either (a) exposes no more than one-half the periphery of a bottom bar of the top layer of steel reinforcement, or (b) the length of an exposed bar does not exceed 12-continuous inches along the length of the bar.
However, Type 1 Deck Repair does not include concrete excavation which occurred during Scarification.
The scope of Work for Type 1 Deck Repair includes: 1.
Excavating and disposing of the unsound concrete within the repair area, below the
Scarification Depth. 2.
Repair of steel reinforcing bars damaged by the Contractor. 3.
Sandblast or water-blast the finished surface and exposed rebar (may be done during
Surface Preparation as described in Section 6-21.3(8)A). 4.
Flush, saturate, and remove freestanding water.

Type 1 Deck Repair does not include filling the excavated area with Modified Concrete (or other concrete).
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 6-323 6-21
Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash
If the modified concrete overlay is placed on a bridge deck as part of the same Contract as the bridge deck construction, then all Work associated with Type 1 Deck Repair shall be performed at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. 6-21.3(7)F
Type 2 Deck Repair
An area will be classified as a Type 2 Deck Repair when the completed concrete excavation complies with both of the following: 1.
Concrete excavation took place below the Scarification Depth and 2.
Concrete excavation either exposes more than one-half the periphery of a bottom bar of the top layer of steel reinforcement or the length of an exposed bar exceeds 12-continuous inches along the length of the bar.

However, Type 2 Deck Repair does not include concrete excavation which occurred during Scarification.
The scope of Work for Type 2 Deck Repair includes: 1.
Excavating and disposing of the unsound concrete within the repair area, below the
Scarification Depth. 2.
Repairing steel reinforcing bars damaged by the Contractor. 3.
Sandblasting or water-blasting the area and exposed rebar prior to placing patching concrete. 4.
Flushing, saturating, and removing freestanding water. 5.
All work related to patching and curing the excavated area with Concrete Class M or modified concrete.
If the modified concrete overlay is placed on a bridge deck as part of the same Contract as the bridge deck construction, then all Work associated with Type 2 Deck Repair shall be performed at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. 6-21.3(7)G
Filling and Curing Deck Repair Areas

Type 1 Deck Repairs shall be filled with Modified Concrete as part of and during placement of the Modified Concrete Overlay. See Section 6-21.3(8).
Type 2 Deck Repairs shall be patched with either concrete Class M or modified concrete.
The top of these patches shall be at the bottom elevation of the Scarification Depth.
Regardless of whether the Contractor uses concrete Class M or modified concrete for the patching material, all Type 2 deck repair patching shall be performed well enough in advance of the modified concrete overlay to allow all patches to cure as required below.
Before placing Concrete Class M or modified concrete in the Type 2 deck repairs, the
Contractor shall clean the surfaces to which the concrete will be applied (including rebar) by (1) water-blasting, or (2) sandblasting and flushing with water. The Contractor shall make sure the existing concrete is well saturated at the time of placing concrete in the
Type 2 deck repairs but shall remove all freestanding water prior to placing the concrete.
The Contractor shall place concrete in the Type 2 deck repair areas while the existing concrete is wet. It shall be consolidated in accordance with Section 6-02.3(8) and wet cured for a minimum of 42 hours in accordance with the same requirements as the
Modified Concrete Overlay in Section 6-21.3(10), but separately and prior to placing the
Modified Concrete Overlay. During the curing period of concrete placed in Type 2 deck repairs, all vehicular and foot traffic shall be prohibited in the repair area. 6-21.3(8)

Modified Concrete Overlay 6-21.3(8)A
Surface Preparation
When modified concrete is to be placed against the concrete in a previously placed transverse joint, lane, or strip, the previously placed concrete shall be sawed back 6
Page 6-324
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21 inches to straight and vertical edges and shall be sandblasted or water-blasted before new concrete is placed. The Engineer may decrease the 6-inch saw back requirement to
2 inches minimum, if a bulkhead was used during previous concrete placement and the concrete was hand vibrated along the bulkhead.
Following the completion of all Type 1 and Type 2 Deck Repairs (including placement and curing of patching Type 2 Deck Repair areas), the entire lane or strip being overlaid shall undergo final cleaning. Final cleaning shall be accomplished in one shift and consists of the following, in the sequence shown: 1.
Remove oil, grease, rust and other foreign material that may still be present. These materials shall be removed by detergent-cleaning or other method accepted by the
Engineer. 2.
Sandblast the area cleaned in item 1.

3.
Remove all blasting media, films, laitance, and other debris on the entire lane or strip to be overlaid by water-blasting the entire lane or strip to be overlaid. 4.
Remove all standing water by vacuuming. 5.
Remove remaining films, laitance, foreign material, or other debris.
If, after final cleaning, the lane or strip being overlaid becomes contaminated - by runoff, concrete laitance, or other debris - the Contractor shall repeat the sequence in items 1 through 5.
Concrete placement shall begin within 24 hours of the completion of final cleaning for the portion of the deck to be overlaid. If concrete placement has not begun within 24 hours of final cleaning, the lane or strip being overlaid shall be cleaned by a light sandblasting followed by washing with the high-pressure water spray or by cleaning with the highpressure spray within 24 hours of overlay placement. 6-21.3(8)B
Restrictions on Other Work
Hand tool chipping, sandblasting, water-blasting, and cleaning in areas adjacent to a lane or strip being cleaned in final preparation for placing modified concrete shall be discontinued when final preparation is begun. Scarifying and hand tool chipping shall remain suspended until the concrete has been placed and the requirement for curing time has been satisfied. Sandblasting and cleaning shall remain suspended for the first 24 hours of curing time after the completion of concrete placing.
Scarification and debris removal may proceed during the final cleaning and overlay placement phases of the Work on adjacent portions of the Structure so long as the
Scarification and debris removal operations are confined to areas which are a minimum of 100 feet away from the defined limits of the final cleaning or overlay placement in progress. If the Scarification and debris removal impedes or interferes in any way with the final cleaning or overlay placement as determined by the Engineer, the Scarification and debris removal Work shall be terminated immediately and the Scarification and debris removal equipment removed sufficiently away from the area being prepared or overlaid to eliminate the conflict. If the grade is such that water and contaminants from the Scarification and debris removal operation will flow into the area being prepared or overlaid, the Scarification and debris removal operation shall be terminated and shall remain suspended for the first 24 hours of curing time after the completion of concrete placement.
Traffic other than required construction equipment will not be permitted on any portion of the lane or strip being overlaid that has undergone final preparation for placing concrete unless allowed by the Engineer. To prevent contamination, all equipment allowed on the deck after final cleaning shall be equipped with drip guards.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 6-325 6-21
Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21.3(8)C
Finishing Machine Setup
Screed rails upon which the finishing machine travels shall be placed outside the area to be overlaid. Interlocking rail sections or other approved methods of providing rail continuity are required.
Hold-down devices shot into the concrete are not permitted unless the concrete is to be subsequently overlaid. Hold-down devices of other types leaving holes in the exposed area will be allowed provided the holes are subsequently filled with mortar conforming to Section 9-20.4(2) mixed at a 1:2 cement/aggregate ratio. Hold-down devices shall not penetrate the existing deck by more than ¾ inch.
A dry-run of the screed shall demonstrate a finished surface that is + ¼ inch/- ⅛ inch from the Engineer’s Top of Overlay Model. The finishing machine shall be passed over the entire surface to be overlaid and the final screed rail adjustments shall be made to comply with these tolerance limits. After adjustments are made to demonstrate compliance with these tolerance limits, changes in the finishing machine elevation controls will not be allowed.
The Contractor shall be responsible for setting screed control to obtain the specified Top of Overlay Model as well as the finished surface smoothness requirements specified in
Section 6-02.3(10)D3. 6-21.3(8)D

Placing Modified Concrete Overlay 6-21.3(8)D1
Pre-Overlay Conference
Five to ten working days prior to modified concrete overlay placement, a pre-overlay conference shall be held to discuss equipment, construction procedures, personnel, and previous results. Inspection procedures shall also be reviewed to ensure coordination.
Those attending representing the Contractor shall include the superintendent and all foremen in charge of placing, finishing, and curing the modified concrete overlay.
If the project includes more than one bridge deck, an additional conference shall be held just before placing modified concrete overlay for each subsequent bridge deck. 6-21.3(8)D2
Placement of Modified Concrete Overlay
The Contractor shall not begin placing the modified concrete overlay until the Engineer agrees that: 1.
The Contractor has complied with the requirements of Sections 6-21.3(8)A, 6-21.3(8)
B, 6-21.3(8)C, and the 6-hour pre-saturation requirement in this section. 2.
Modified concrete overlay producing and placement rates will be high enough to meet placing and finishing deadlines,

3.
Finishers with enough experience have been employed, and 4.
Adequate finishing tools and equipment are at the site. 5.
Rain is not expected. 6.
Concrete shall not be placed when the temperature of the existing concrete surface is less than 45ºF or greater than 75ºF, and wind velocity one foot above the bridge deck is in excess of 10 mph. If the Contractor elects to Work at night to meet these criteria, adequate lighting shall be provided at no additional expense to the Contracting
Agency.
Concrete placement shall be made in accordance with Section 6-02 and the following requirements: 1.
Concrete shall not be placed against the edge of an adjacent lane or strip that is less than 36 hours old. 2.
After the lane or strip to be overlaid has been prepared, it shall be thoroughly saturated and kept continuously wet with water (pre-saturated) for a minimum period
Page 6-326

2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21 of 6 hours prior to placement of the concrete. All freestanding water shall be removed prior to concrete placement. During concrete placement, the lane or strip shall be kept moist. 3.
Immediately ahead of placement of the modified concrete, a slurry of the modified concrete, excluding coarse aggregate, shall be thoroughly brushed into the surface prior to the overlay placement. Care shall be exercised to ensure that the surface receives a thorough, even coating of slurry and that the rate of progress is limited so that the brushed concrete does not become dry before it is covered with additional concrete as required for the final grade. All aggregate which is segregated from the mix during the brushing operation shall be removed from the deck and disposed of by the Contractor. 4.
The concrete shall then be promptly and continuously delivered and deposited on the placement side of the finishing machine. 5.
The Contractor shall ensure that a sufficient number of trucks are used for concrete delivery to obtain a consistent and continuous delivery and placement of concrete throughout the concrete placement operation. 6.
Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect freshly placed concrete in the event that rain begins during placement. Concrete that is damaged by rain shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency, and to the satisfaction of the Engineer. 7.
Concrete shall not be placed when the temperature of the existing concrete surface is less than 45ºF or greater than 75ºF, and wind velocity one foot above the bridge deck is in excess of 10 mph. If the Contractor elects to Work at night to meet these criteria, adequate lighting shall be provided at no additional expense to the Contracting
Agency. 8.
If concrete placement is stopped for a period of ½ hour or more, the Contractor shall install a bulkhead transverse to the direction of placement at a position where the overlay can be finished full width up to the bulkhead. The bulkhead shall be full depth of the overlay and shall be installed to grade. The concrete shall be finished and cured in accordance with these Specifications. 9.
Further placement is permitted after the bulkhead is removed, the previously placed concrete is sawn back from the bulkhead to a point designated by the Engineer to straight and vertical edges, all previously placed slurry scrub is completely removed, the Contractor has performed surface preparation to all contaminated areas in accordance with 6-21.3(8)A including the sawn vertical edge, and one of the following waiting periods: a.
After a minimum of 12 hours of curing (in accordance with Section 6-21.3(10)) the concrete edge that was bulkheaded, or

b.
In less than 12 hours of curing (in accordance with Section 6-21.3(10)) the concrete edge that was bulkheaded provided a gap is left in the lane or strip of sufficient width for the finishing machine to clear the transverse bulkhead installed where concrete placement was stopped. 6-21.3(8)E
Acceptance Testing Modified Concrete
When the Contractor has released the Concrete for acceptance testing, the Engineer will perform slump, temperature, and entrained air tests in accordance with Section 6-02.3(5)
D and as specified in this section. Concrete samples for testing shall be supplied to the
Engineer in accordance with Section 6-02.3(5)E. Concrete from the first truckload shall not be placed on the deck until tests for acceptance have been completed by the Engineer and the results indicate that the concrete is within acceptable limits. Sampling and testing will continue for each load until two successive loads meet all applicable acceptance test
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 6-327 6-21
Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash

requirements. Except for the first load of concrete, up to ½ cubic yard may be placed on the deck prior to testing for acceptance. After two successive tests indicate that the concrete is within specified limits, the sampling and testing frequency may decrease to one for every three truckloads. Loads to be sampled will be selected in accordance with the random selection process outlined in FOP for WAQTC TM2.
When the results of subsequent acceptance test indicates that the concrete does not conform to the specified limits, the sampling and testing frequency will be resumed for each truckload. Whenever two successive subsequent tests indicate that the concrete is within the specified limits, the random sampling and testing frequency of one for every three truck loads may resume. 6-21.3(9)
Finishing Modified Concrete Overlay
Finishing shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable portions of Section 6-02.3(10), Section 6-21.3(2)G, and as follows. Concrete shall be placed and struck-off approximately ½ inch above final grade and then consolidated and finished to final grade with a single pass (the Engineer may require additional passes) of the finishing machine.
Hand finishing may be necessary to close up or seal off the surface. The final product shall be a dense uniform surface.
Construction dams shall be separated from the newly placed concrete by passing a pointing trowel along the inside surfaces of the dams. Care shall be exercised to ensure that this trowel cut is made for the entire depth and length of the dams after the concrete has stiffened sufficiently that it does not flow back.
Deck finishing machine screed rails may be removed at any time after the modified concrete overlay has taken an initial set. Adequate precautions shall be taken during the removal of the finishing machine and rails to protect the edges of the new surfaces. 6-21.3(10)
Curing Modified Concrete Overlay
As the finishing operation progresses, the concrete shall be immediately covered with a single layer of clean, new or used, wet burlap. The burlap shall have a maximum width of
6 feet. The Engineer will determine the suitability of the burlap for reuse, based on the cleanliness and absorption ability of the burlap. Care shall be exercised to ensure that the burlap is well drained and laid flat with no wrinkles on the deck surface. Adjacent strips of burlap shall have a minimum overlap of 6 inches.
Once in place the burlap shall be lightly fog sprayed with water. A separate layer of white, reflective type polyethylene sheeting shall immediately be placed over the wet burlap.
As an alternative to the application of burlap and fog spraying described above, the
Contractor may propose a curing system using proprietary curing blankets specifically manufactured for bridge deck curing. The Contractor shall submit a Type 2 Working
Drawing consisting of details of the proprietary curing blanket system, including product literature and details of how the system is to be installed and maintained.
The burlap shall be kept wet continuously and the wet curing regimen as described shall remain in place for a minimum of 42-hours. 6-21.3(11)

Checking for Bond
After the requirements for curing have been met, the entire overlaid surface shall be sounded by the Contractor in accordance with ASTM D4580, in a manner accepted by and in the presence of the Engineer, to ensure total bond of the concrete to the bridge deck. 6-21.3(11)A
Repairing Unbonded Concrete
All Work in this Section, 6-21.3(11)A, shall be performed at no additional expense to the
Contracting Agency.
Page 6-328
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21
Concrete in unbonded areas shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the following: 1.
Section 6-21.3(7)C, Deck Repair Excavation, and the following: Saw cut the edges around the repair area with an edge perpendicular to the concrete surface. The depth of the saw cut shall be ¾ inch but shall be reduced if necessary to avoid damaging the reinforcement. The geometry of the repair perimeter shall be rectangular, avoiding reentrant corners. All concrete in the removal area shall be removed by chipping, or other approved mechanical means to the depth necessary to remove all loose or unsound concrete. All removal shall maintain square edges at the boundaries of the repair area. 2.
Section 6-21.3(7)D, Repair of Steel Reinforcing Bars

3.
Section 6-21.3(8)A, Surface Preparation 4.
Section 6-21.3(8)B, Restrictions on Other Work 5.
Section 6-21.3(8)D, Placing Modified Concrete Overlay. Concrete for patching shall be the same modified concrete as used in the overlay. 6.
Section 6-21.3(10), Curing Modified Concrete Overlay.
After curing requirements have been met, all repaired areas shall be sounded by the
Contractor in accordance with this section, and again repaired if any unsound or unbonded concrete is found. 6-21.3(12)
Sealing and Texturing Concrete Overlay
After the requirements for checking for bond have been met, all cold joints (transverse and longitudinal, and around repair areas) and visible cracks shall be filled and sealed with a high molecular weight methacrylate resin (HMWM). Cracks 1/16 inch and greater in width shall receive two applications of HMWM. Immediately following the application of
HMWM, the wetted surface shall be coated with sand for abrasive finish.
After all cracks and cold joints have been filled and sealed and the HMWM resin has cured, the concrete overlay surface shall receive a longitudinally sawn texture in accordance with Section 6-02.3(10)D5.
Traffic shall not be permitted on the finished concrete until it has reached a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi as verified by rebound number determined in accordance with ASTM C805 and the longitudinally sawn texture is completed. 6-21.4

Measurement
Scarifying concrete surface will be measured by the square yard of surface Scarified.
Type 1 Deck Repair and Type 2 Deck Repair will be measured by the square foot of surface area, below the Scarification Depth, of deck concrete removed in accordance with
Section 6-21.3(7). Determination of whether a deck repair is Type 1 or Type 2 shall be in accordance with Section 6-21.3(7).
Modified concrete overlay will be measured by the cubic foot of material placed. The volume will be determined from the concrete supplier’s Certificate of Compliance for each batch delivered less waste. Waste is defined as the following: 1.
Material not placed. 2.
Material placed in excess of 6 inches outside a longitudinal joint or transverse joint.
Finishing and curing modified concrete overlay will be measured by the square yard of overlay surface finished.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 6-329 6-21
Modified Concrete Overlay - Microsilica or Fly Ash 6-21.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Surveying for Modified Conc. Overlay”, lump sum.
The lump sum contract price for “Surveying for Modified Conc. Overlay” shall be full pay to perform the work as specified, including establishing secondary survey control points, performing survey quality control, creating the Existing Bridge Deck Surface
Model, and recording, compiling, and submitting the survey records to the Engineer. “Scarifying Conc. Surface”, per square yard.
The unit Contract price per square yard for “Scarifying Conc. Surface” shall be full pay for performing the Work as specified, including: testing and calibration of the machines and tools used; Scarifying to the Scarification Depth; excavation of unsound concrete below the Scarification Depth when such unsound concrete is removed during the pass of the hydro-demolition machine intended to stop at the Scarification
Depth; disposal of all debris generated; scarification cleanup. “Type 1 Deck Repair”, per square foot.
The unit contract price per square foot for Type 1 Deck Repair shall be full pay for performing the work as specified, including excavating and disposing concrete, and repair of concrete or rebar damaged by the Contractor’s operations. “Type 2 Deck Repair”, per square foot.
The unit contract price per square foot for Type 2 Deck Repair shall be full pay for performing the work as specified, including: excavating and disposing concrete; sandblasting and water-blasting; placing, consolidating, finishing, and curing concrete patches in Type 2 deck repairs; repair of concrete or rebar damaged by the
Contractor’s operations. “Modified Conc. Overlay”, per cubic foot.
The unit contract price per cubic foot for “Modified Conc. Overlay” shall be full pay for furnishing and placing the modified concrete overlay, including the overlay material placed into Type 1 Deck Repairs in accordance with Section 6-21.3(7)G, and preparing the surface for the overlay including cleaning, sandblasting, and water-blasting. “Finishing and Curing Modified Conc. Overlay”, per square yard.
The unit Contract price per square yard for “Finishing and Curing Modified Conc.
Overlay” shall be full pay for performing all work required under Sections 6-21.3(9), 6-21.3(10), 6-21.3(11), and 6-21.3(12) including finishing the modified concrete overlay, curing the modified concrete overlay, checking for bond, repairing unbonded areas, sealing all cracks and cold joints, sanding, and providing longitudinally sawn texture.
Payment for the following shall be considered incidental to and included in the unit contract items included in the contract: 1.

All Work and related costs for implementing the Process Wastewater
Containment and Disposal Plan. 2.
All Work and related costs for implementing the Debris Containment and
Disposal plan. 3.
All Work and related costs for protecting adjacent traffic from flying debris.
Page 6-330
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex 6-22 6-22
Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex 6-22.1
Description
This Section 6-22 is for Contracts with the bid item “Modified Concrete Overlay” when the Contractor elects to use latex modified concrete for the overlay. If the Contractor elects to use microsilica modified concrete or fly ash modified concrete for the overlay, use Section 6-21, Modified Concrete Overlay – Microsilica or Fly Ash.
This Work consists of surveying, Scarifying the existing concrete bridge deck, removing and replacing unsound concrete below the Scarification Depth, and placing, finishing, curing, and texturing a modified concrete overlay using latex modified concrete. 6-21.1(1)

Definitions
The Contractor shall comply with 6-21.1(1). 6-22.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
High Molecular Weight Methacrylate (HMWM) Resin for Crack and Cold Joint Sealing
Sand for Abrasive Finish of Cracks and Cold Joints
Portland Cement
Blended Hydraulic Cement
Latex Admixture
Fine Aggregate
Course Aggregate
Mortar
Burlap Cloth
Admixtures
Water for Concrete 6-22.2(1)

Modified Concrete 6-22.2(1)A
Latex Modified Concrete 6-21.2(3) 6-21.2(3) 9-01.2(1) 9-01.2(1)B 6-22.2(1)A1 9-03.1 9-03.1 9-20.4 9-23.5 9-23.6 9-25.1
The modified concrete shall be latex modified concrete. Latex modified concrete shall be a workable mix, uniform in composition and consistency. Mix proportions per cubic yard shall be as follows:
Type I or II Portland Cement, or
Type IL(X) Blended hydraulic Cement
Fine Aggregate
Coarse Aggregate
Latex Admixture
Water/Cement Ratio
Air Content of Plastic Mix
Slump

1.00 parts by weight
2.40 to 2.75 parts by weight
1.75 to 2.00 parts by weight 3.50-gallons per bag of cement
0.33 maximum
6 percent maximum
7 inches maximum
The aggregates shall be proportioned such that the amount of aggregate passing the No.
4 sieve is 65 ± 5 percent of the total aggregate (fine plus coarse). All calculations shall be based on dry weights.
The moisture content of the fine aggregate and coarse aggregate shall be no more than
3.0 and 1.0 percent, respectively, above the saturated surface dry condition.
The maximum allowable and actual water/cementitious ratio shall be calculated using all of the available mix water, including water added at the plant, water added in transit and at the job site, water in all admixtures, 52 percent of the latex admixture, and the free
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 6-331 6-22
Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex water in the aggregates but not the water absorbed by the aggregates. The following are considered cementitious materials: portland cement and blended hydraulic cement.
Ground granulated blast furnace slag, fly ash, microsilica fume, and Type 3 portland cement shall not be used in Latex Modified concrete.
Fine aggregate shall be Class 1. Coarse aggregate shall be AASHTO grading No. 7 or
No. 8.
The Contractor shall adjust the slump to accommodate the gradient of the bridge deck, subject to the maximum slump specified. 6-22.2(1)A1
Latex Admixture
Latex admixture shall be a non-toxic, film-forming, polymeric emulsion in water to which all stabilizers have been added at the point of manufacture. The latex admixture shall be homogeneous and uniform in composition, and shall conform to the following:
Polymer Type
Stabilizers:
Latex
Portland Cement
Percent Solids
Weight per Gallon
Color White PH (as shipped)
Freeze/Thaw Stability
Shelf Life

Styrene Butadiene
Non-ionic surfactants
Polydimethyl siloxane
46.0 to 49.0
8.4 pounds at 77 ºF
9 minimum
5 cycles (5ºF to 77ºF)
2 years minimum
Latex admixture will be accepted based on submittal of a Manufacturer’s Certificate of
Compliance in accordance with Section 1-06.3. 6-22.2(1)A2

Storing and Handling Latex Admixture
Latex admixture shall be kept in suitable containers that will protect it from freezing and from exposure to temperatures in excess of 85ºF. Containers of the admixture shall not be stored in direct sunlight for periods in excess of 10 days. When stored in direct sunlight the top and sides of the containers shall be covered with insulating blanket material.
Storage of the latex admixture may extend over a period greater than 10 days as long as the conditions specified above are maintained and the latex admixture is agitated or stirred once every 10 days. Stirring or agitation of the admixture shall be done mechanically in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation. If the ambient temperature is higher than 85ºF at any time during the storage period, the admixture shall be covered by insulated blankets or other means that will maintain the admixture temperature below 85ºF.
Latex admixture shall be strained through a Number 10 strainer at the time it is introduced into the mixing tank from the storage containers. 6-22.2(2)
Concrete Class M
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.2(2). 6-22.2(3)
Materials for Sealing Cracks and Cold Joints
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.2(3). 6-22.3 6-22.3(1)
Construction Requirements
Sequence of Work

The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(1).
Page 6-332
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex 6-22.3(2)
Equipment 6-22.3(2)A
Rotary Milling Machines 6-22
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(2)A. 6-22.3(2)B
Hydro-Demolition Machines
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(2)B. 6-22.3(2)C
Power Driven Hand Tools
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(2)C. 6-22.3(2)D

Air Compressor
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(2)D. 6-22.3(2)E
Vacuum Machine
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(2)E. 6-22.3(2)F
Water Delivery System
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(2)F. 6-22.3(2)G
Finishing Machine
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(2)G. 6-22.3(2)H
Mobile Mixer for Latex Modified Concrete
Latex modified concrete shall be mixed and transported in self-contained, self-propelled, continuous-mixing units conforming to the following requirements: 1.

The mixer shall be equipped so that it can be grounded. 2.
The mixer shall be equipped to provide positive measurement of the portland cement being introduced into the mix. A recording meter, visible at all times and equipped with a ticket printout, shall be used. 3.
The mixer shall be equipped to provide positive control of the flow of water and latex admixture into the mixing chamber. Water flow shall be indicated by a flow meter with a minimum readability of ½ gallon per minute, accurate to ± 1 percent. The water system shall have a bypass valve capable of completely diverting the flow of water.
Latex flow shall also be indicated by a flow meter with a minimum readability of 2 gallons per minute, accurate to ± 1 percent. The latex system shall be equipped with a bypass valve suitable for obtaining a calibrated sample of admixture. 4.
The mixer shall automatically proportion and blend all components of the specified mix on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the finishing operation. 5.
The mixer shall discharge mixed material through a conventional chute directly in front of the finishing machine.
Inspection of each mobile mixer shall be done by the Contractor in the presence of the
Engineer and in accordance with the following requirements: 1.
Check the manufacturer’s inspection plate or mix setting chart for the serial number, the proper operating revolutions per minute (rpm), and the approximate number of counts on the cement meter to deliver 94 pounds of cement. 2.
Make a general inspection of the mobile mixer to ensure cleanliness and good maintenance practices.

3.
Check to see that the aggregate bins are empty and clean and that the bin vibrators work.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 6-333 6-22
Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex 4.
Verify that the cement aeration system operates, that the vent is open, and that the mixer is equipped with a grounding strap. Check the cement meter feeder to ensure that all fins and pockets are clean and free from accumulated cement. If the operator cannot demonstrate, through visual inspection, that the cement meter feeder is clean, all cement shall be removed from the bin and the cement meter feeder inspected. The aeration system shall be equipped with a gauge or indicator to verify that the system is operating. 5.
Verify that the main belt is clean and free of accumulated materials. 6.
Check the latex strainer to ensure cleanliness.
The initial calibration shall be in accordance with items 6-22.3(2)H1 through 6-22.3(2)H5 as follows: 6-22.3(2)H1

Cement Meter a.
Refer to the truck manufacturer’s mix setting chart to determine the specified operating rpm and the approximate number of counts required on the cement meter to deliver 94 pounds of cement. b.
Place at least 40 bags (about 4,000 pounds) of cement in the cement bin. c.
Ensure the mixer is resting on a level surface. d.
Ensure the mixer is grounded. e.
Adjust the engine throttle to obtain the specified rpm. Operate the unit, discharging cement until the belt has made one complete revolution. Stop the belt. Reset the cement meter to zero. Position a suitable container to catch the cement and discharge approximately one bag of cement. With a stopwatch, measure the time required to discharge the cement. Record the number of counts on the cement meter and determine the weight of the cement in the container.
Repeat the process of discharging approximately one bag of cement until six runs have been made. Reset the cement meter to zero for each run.
Example Calibration Record:
Run No. 1 2 3 4 5 6
TOTAL

Cement Counts 66 68 67 66 67 66 400
Weight of Cement 95 96 95.5 95 95.25 95 571.75
Time in Seconds 31 31.2 31.0 29.8 30.5 30.8 184.3
Pounds of cement per count on cement meter:
Weight of Cement
No. of Counts = 571.75 400 = 1.43 LB./Count
Counts per bag (94 pounds): 94 = 65.7 Counts Bag 1.43
Pounds of cement discharged per second:
Time in Seconds = 571.75 184.3 = 3.10 LB./SEC.
Required time to discharge one bag:
Time =

Page 6-334 94 = 30.32 SEC./Bag 3.10
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex 6-22.3(2)H2 6-22
Latex Throttling Valve a.
Check to be sure that the latex strainer is unobstructed. b.
The latex throttling valve shall be adjusted to deliver 3.5 gallons of latex (29.4 pounds) for each bag of cement. From the above calculation 30.32 seconds are required to deliver one bag of cement. c.
With the unit operating at the specified rpm, discharge latex into a container for 30.3 seconds and determine the weight of latex. Continue adjusting the valve until 29.4 to 29.5 pounds of latex is discharged in 30.3 seconds. Verify the accuracy of this valve setting three times. 6-22.3(2)H3
Water Flow Meter a.
Set the water flow meter by adjusting it to flow at ½ gallon per minute. b.
Collect and weigh the water discharged during a 1-minute interval with the equipment operating at the specified rpm. Divide the weight of water by 8.34 to determine the number of gallons. c.
Repeat items a. and b., above, with the flow meter adjusted to 1½ gallons per minute.

6-22.3(2)H4
Aggregate Bin Gates a.
Set the gate openings to provide the amount of aggregate required to produce concrete having the specified proportions. b.
Discharge a representative sample of the aggregates through the gates and separate on the No. 4 sieve. Aggregates shall meet the requirements for proportions in accordance with Section 6-22.3(3)E. c.
Adjust the gate openings if necessary to provide the proper ratio of fine aggregate to total aggregate. 6-22.3(2)H5
Mobile Mixer Trial Runs and Calibration
Each mobile mixer shall be operated to produce at least ½ cubic yard of concrete, which shall be in compliance with these Specifications, prior to acceptance of the mobile mixer for job use. The Engineer will perform yield, slump, and air tests on the concrete produced by each mixer. Calibration of each mobile mixer shall be done by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer. A complete calibration is required on each mixer on each concrete placement unless, after the initial calibration, the personnel having the responsibility of mixer calibration on subsequent concrete placement were present during the initial calibration of the mixer and during the concrete placement operations and are able to verify the dial settings of the initial calibration and concrete placement.
If these criteria are met, a complete calibration need not be repeated provided that a single trial run verifies the previous settings of the cement meter, latex throttling valve, water flow meter, and aggregate gradations, and that the mixer has not left the project and the Engineer is satisfied that a complete calibration is not needed. 6-22.3(2)H6
Production Mixing Latex Modified Concrete
The mobile mixer shall be operated with strict adherence to the procedures set forth by its manufacturer.
A minimum of two mobile mixers will be required at the overlay site for each concrete placement when the total volume of concrete to be placed during the concrete placement exceeds the material storage capacity of a single mobile mixer. Additional mobile mixers may be required if conditions require that material be stockpiled away from the jobsite.
The Contractor shall have sufficient mobile mixers on hand to ensure a consistent and continuous delivery and placement of concrete throughout the concrete placement.
Charging the mobile mixer shall be done in the presence of the Engineer. Mixing capabilities shall be such that the finishing operation can proceed at a steady pace.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 6-335 6-22
Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex 6-22.3(3)
Submittals
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(3), with the following revisions:
Item 5 is revised to read: "5. A Type 2 Working Drawing of the mix designs for concrete class M and Letex Modified Concrete. The Contractor's submittal of a mix design shall be on WSDOT Form 350-040 and shall provide a unique identification for each mix design. A unique identification for the mix design is composed of the combination of the Mix Design Number and the Concrete Plant Number".
Item 8 is added as follows: "8. A Type 1 Working Drawing of samples of the latex admixture and the portland cement (or blended hydraulic cement) for testing and compatibility." 6-22.3(4)
Surveying for Modified Concrete Overlay
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(4). 6-22.3(5)
Operations on the Bridge Deck

The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(5). 6-22.3(6)
Scarifying Concrete Surface
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(6). 6-22.3(7)
Deck Repair
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(7). 6-22.3(8)
Modified Concrete Overlay 6-22.3(8)A
Surface Preparation
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(8)A. 6-22.3(8)B
Restrictions on Other Work
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(8)B. 6-22.3(8)C

Finishing Machine Setup
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(8)C. 6-22.3(8)D
Placing Modified Concrete Overlay
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(8)D. 6-22.3(8)E
Acceptance Testing Latex Modified Concrete
The Engineer will perform slump, temperature, and entrained air tests for acceptance in accordance with Section 6-02.3(5)D and as specified in this section after the Contractor has turned over the concrete for acceptance testing. The Engineer will perform testing as the concrete is being placed. Samples shall be taken on the first charge through each mobile mixer and every other charge thereafter. The sample shall be taken after the first 2 minutes of continuous mixer operation. Concrete samples for testing shall be supplied to the Engineer in accordance with Section 6-02.3(5)E.
During the initial proportioning, mixing, placing, and finishing operations, the Engineer may require the presence of a technical representative from the latex admixture manufacturer. The technical representative shall be capable of performing, demonstrating, inspecting, and testing all of the functions required for placement of the latex modified concrete as specified in Section 6-21.3(8)D. This technical representative shall aid in the proper installation of the latex modified concrete. Recommendations made by the technical representative on or off the jobsite shall be adhered to by the Contractor. The
Engineer will advise the Contractor in writing a minimum of 5 working days before such services are required.
Page 6-336
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10

Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex 6-22.3(9) 6-22
Finishing Modified Concrete Overlay
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(9) and the following:
Latex shall not be sprayed on a freshly placed latex modified concrete surface; however, a light fog spray of water is permitted if required for finishing, as determined by the
Engineer. 6-22.3(10)
Curing Modified Concrete Overlay
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(10). 6-22.3(11)
Checking for Bond
The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(11). 6-22.3(12)
Sealing and Texturing Concrete Overlay

The Contractor shall comply with Section 6-21.3(12). 6-22.4
Measurement
Scarifying concrete surface will be measured by the square yard of surface Scarified.
Type 1 Deck Repair and Type 2 Deck Repair will be measured by the square foot of surface area, below the Scarification Depth, of deck concrete removed in accordance with
Section 6-21.3(7). Determination of whether a deck repair is Type 1 or Type 2 shall be in accordance with section 6-21.3(7).
Modified concrete overlay will be measured by the cubic foot of material placed. For latex modified concrete overlay, the volume will be determined by the theoretical yield of the design mix and documented by the counts of the cement meter less waste. Waste is defined as the following: 1.
Material not placed. 2.
Material placed in excess of 6 inches outside a longitudinal joint or transverse joint.
Finishing and curing modified concrete overlay will be measured by the square yard of overlay surface finished. 6-22.5
Payment

Payment will be made for each of the following Bid Items that are included in the Bid
Proposal: “Surveying for Modified Conc. Overlay”, lump sum.
The lump sum contract price for “Surveying for Modified Conc. Overlay” shall be full pay to perform the work as specified, including establishing secondary survey control points, performing survey quality control, creating the Existing Bridge Deck Surface Model, and recording, compiling, and submitting the survey records to the Engineer. “Scarifying Conc. Surface”, per square yard.
The unit Contract price per square yard for “Scarifying Conc. Surface” shall be full pay for performing the Work as specified, including: testing and calibration of the machines and tools used; Scarifying to the Scarification Depth; excavation of unsound concrete below the Scarification Depth when such unsound concrete is removed during the pass of the hydro-demolition machine intended to stop at the Scarification Depth; disposal of all debris generated; scarification cleanup. “Type 1 Deck Repair”, per square foot.
The unit contract price per square foot for Type 1 Deck Repair shall be full pay for performing the work as specified, including excavating and disposing concrete, and repair of concrete or rebar damaged by the contractor’s operations.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 6-337 6-22
Modified Concrete Overlay - Latex “Type 2 Deck Repair”, per square foot.
The unit contract price per square foot for Type 2 Deck Repair shall be full pay for performing the work as specified, including: excavating and disposing concrete; sandblasting and water-blasting; placing, consolidating, finishing, and curing concrete patches in Type 2 deck repairs; repair of concrete or rebar damaged by the contractor’s operations. “Modified Conc. Overlay”, per cubic foot.
The unit contract price per cubic foot for “Modified Conc. Overlay” shall be full pay for furnishing and placing the modified concrete overlay, including the overlay material placed into Type 1 Deck Repairs in accordance with Section 6-21.3(7)G, and preparing the surface for the overlay including cleaning, sandblasting, and water-blasting. “Finishing and Curing Modified Conc. Overlay”, per square yard.
The unit Contract price per square yard for “Finishing and Curing Modified Conc. Overlay” shall be full pay for performing all work required under Sections 6-22.3(9), 6-22.3(10), 6-22.3(11), and 6-22.3(12) including finishing the modified concrete overlay, curing the modified concrete overlay, checking for bond, repairing unbonded areas, sealing all cracks and cold joints, sanding, and providing longitudinally sawn texture.
Payment for the following shall be considered incidental to and included in the unit contract items included in the contract: 1.

All Work and related costs for implementing the Process Wastewater Containment and Disposal plan 2.
All Work and related costs for implementing the debris containment and disposal plan. 3.
All Work and related costs for protecting adjacent traffic from flying debris.
The unit Contract price per square yard for “Finishing and Curing Modified Conc.
Overlay” shall be full pay for performing all work required under Sections 6-21.3(9), 6-21.3(10), 6-21.3(11), and 6-21.3(12) including finishing the modified concrete overlay, curing the modified concrete overlay, checking for bond, repairing unbonded areas, sealing all cracks and cold joints, sanding, and providing longitudinally sawn texture.
Payment for the following shall be considered incidental to and included in the unit contract items included in the contract: 1.
All Work and related costs for implementing the Process Wastewater
Containment and Disposal Plan. 2.
All Work and related costs for implementing the Debris Containment and
Disposal plan.

3.
Page 6-338
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Division 7 7-01 7-01.1
Drainage Structures, Storm Sewers,
Sanitary Sewers, Water Mains, and Conduits
Drains
Description
This Work consists of constructing drain pipe and underdrain pipe in accordance with the
Plans, these Specifications and Standard Plans, at the locations staked. 7-01.2
Materials

Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Gravel Backfill for Drains 9-03.12(4)
Zinc Coated (Galvanized) or Aluminum Coated (Aluminized)
Corrugated Iron or Steel Drain Pipe 9-05.1(2)
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Drain Pipe 9-05.1(3)
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Drain Pipe, Couplings and Fittings 9-05.1(5)
Corrugated Polyethylene (PE) Drain Pipe, Couplings and
Fittings (up to 10 inch) 9-05.1(6)
Corrugated Polyethylene (PE) Drain Pipe, Couplings and Fittings (12 through 60 inch) 9-05.1(7)
Corrugated Iron or Steel Underdrain Pipe 9-05.2(4)
Perforated Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Underdrain Pipe 9-05.2(5)
Perforated Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Underdrain Pipe, 8-inch diameter maximum 9-05.2(6)
Perforated Corrugated Polyethylene (PE) Underdrain Pipe (up to 10 inch) 9-05.2(7)
Perforated Corrugated Polyethylene (PE) Underdrain Pipe (12 through 60 inch) 9-05.2(8)
Drain pipes may be concrete, zinc coated (galvanized) corrugated iron, aluminum coated (aluminized) corrugated iron, zinc coated (galvanized) steel, aluminum coated (aluminized) steel, corrugated aluminum alloy, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), or corrugated polyethylene (PE) at the option of the Contractor unless the Plans specify the type to be used.
Underdrain pipe, other than AASHTO M36 Type III Class IV, shall be perforated. They may be concrete, bituminized fiber, zinc coated (galvanized) corrugated iron, aluminum coated (aluminized) corrugated iron, zinc coated (galvanized) steel, aluminum coated (aluminized) steel, corrugated aluminum alloy, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), or corrugated polyethylene (PE) at the option of the Contractor unless the Plans specify the type to be used.
It is not necessary that all drain or underdrain pipes on any one project be of the same kind of material; however, all contiguous pipe shall be of the same kind.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-1 7-01 7-01.3
Drains
Construction Requirements
A trench of the dimensions shown in the Plans or as specified by the Engineer shall be excavated to the grade and line given by the Engineer. 7-01.3(1)
Drain Pipe
Drain pipe shall be laid in conformity with the line and grades as shown in the Plans. The drain pipe shall be laid with soil tight joints unless otherwise specified. PVC drain pipe shall be jointed with a bell and spigot joint using a flexible elastomeric seal as described in Section 9-04.8. The bell shall be laid upstream. PE drain pipe shall be jointed with snap-on, screw-on, bell and spigot, or wraparound coupling bands as recommended by the manufacturer of the tubing. 7-01.3(2)
Underdrain Pipe
When underdrain pipe is being installed as a means of intercepting ground or surface water, the trench shall be fine-graded in the existing soil 3 inches below the grade of the pipe as shown in the Plans. Gravel backfill shall be used under the pipe. Gravel backfill shall be placed to the depth shown in the Plans or as designated by the Engineer. All backfill shall be placed in 12-inch maximum layers and be thoroughly compacted with three passes of a vibratory compactor for each layer. The Contractor shall use care in placing the gravel backfill material to prevent its contamination.
Class 2 perforations shall be used unless otherwise specified. When Class 1 perforations are specified the perforated pipe shall be laid with the perforations down. Upon final acceptance of the Work, all drain pipes shall be open, clean, and free draining. Perforated pipe does not require a watertight joint. PVC underdrain pipe shall be jointed using either the flexible elastomeric seal as described in Section 9-04.8 or solvent cement as described in Section 9-04.9, at the option of the Contractor unless otherwise specified in the Plans.
The bell shall be laid upstream. PE drainage tubing underdrain pipe shall be jointed with snap-on, screw-on, bell and spigot, or wraparound coupling bands, as recommended by the manufacturer of the tubing. 7-01.4

Measurement
The length of drain or underdrain pipe will be the number of linear feet of completed installation measured along the invert. Pipe placed in excess of the length shown in the
Plans will not be measured or paid for.
Excavation of the trench will be measured as Structure excavation Class B or Structure excavation Class B including haul by the cubic yard as specified in Section 2-09.
Gravel backfill for drains will be measured by the volume placed within the neatline limits of Structure excavation Class B. 7-01.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Drain Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Underdrain Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Gravel Backfill for Drain”, per cubic yard. “Structure Excavation Class B”, per cubic yard. “Structure Excavation Class B Incl. Haul”, per cubic yard.
Page 7-2
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Culvert Pipe 7-02 7-02
Culvert Pipe 7-02.1
Description
This Work consists of constructing culvert pipes of the various types and classes in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and the Standard Plans, at the locations staked.
Culvert pipes may be used for transverse drains under the Roadway or as conduits for water pipe or other utilities passing under the Roadway. 7-02.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Cement
Aggregates for Concrete
Gravel Backfill for Pipe Zone Bedding
Butyl Rubber Sealant
External Sealing Band
Plain Concrete Culvert Pipe
Reinforced Concrete Culvert Pipe
Mitered Concrete End Sections
Steel Culvert Pipe and Pipe Arch
Steel Nestable Pipe and Pipe Arch
Steel End Sections
Aluminum Culvert Pipe
Aluminum End Sections
Solid Wall PVC Culvert Pipe
Profile Wall PVC Culvert Pipe
Corrugated Polyethylene Culvert Pipe
Steel Rib Reinforced Polyethylene Culvert Pipe
High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe
Polypropylene Culvert Pipe
Steel Reinforcing Bar
Epoxy-Coated Steel Reinforcing Bar
Welded Wire Reinforcement
Deformed Wire
Cold Drawn Wire
Grout
Mortar
Concrete Curing Materials and Admixtures

9-01 9-03.1 9-03.12(3) 9-04.11 9-04.12 9-05.3(1) 9-05.3(2) 9-05.3(3) 9-05.4 9-05.4(8) 9-05.4(9) 9-05.5 9-05.5(6) 9-05.12(1) 9-05.12(2) 9-05.19 9-05.21 9-05.23 9-05.24 9-07.2 9-07.3 9-07.7 9-07.8 9-07.9 9-20.3(2) 9-20.4 9-23
Where steel or aluminum are referred to in this section in regard to a kind of culvert pipe, pipe arch, or end sections, it shall be understood that steel is zinc coated (galvanized) or aluminum coated (aluminized) corrugated iron or steel, and aluminum is corrugated aluminum alloy as specified in Sections 9-05.4 and 9-05.5.
Thermoplastic culvert pipe includes solid wall PVC culvert pipe, profile wall PVC culvert pipe, corrugated polyethylene culvert pipe, steel rib reinforced polyethylene culvert pipe, high-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe, and polypropylene culvert pipe.
It is not necessary that all culvert pipe on any one project be of the same kind of material.
However, all contiguous pipe shall be of the same size, material, thickness, class, and treatment and shall be that required for the maximum height of cover.
Measurement for payment of the Bid items associated with the drainage installation will be based on the diameter of the culvert pipe described by the Bid item in the Proposal.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-3 7-02
Culvert Pipe

When schedule A, B, C, or D culvert pipe is specified in the Plans, the Contractor shall provide the specified schedule and diameter but has the option of furnishing any of the acceptable materials shown in the Culvert Pipe Schedules Table.
The use of tongue and groove concrete pipe shall only be allowed under side road connections. All tongue and groove pipe shall be joined with cement mortar or butyl rubber sealant.
Culvert Pipe Schedules
Schedule (Fill Height)
A 2′ - 15′
B 15′ - 25′
C 25′ - 40′
D 40′ - 60′
Diameter in inches
Concrete

Steel 2⅔″ × ½″
Aluminum 2⅔″ × ½″
Thermoplastic
PE1, PVC2, or PP3 12, 18, 24
Class III .064″ (16 Ga.) .060″ (16 Ga.)
PE, PVC, or PP 30, 36
Class III .064″ (16 Ga.) .075″ (14 Ga.)
PE, PVC, or PP 42, 48
Class III .064″ (16 Ga.) .105″ (12 Ga.)
PE, PVC, or PP

12, 18, 24
Class V .064″ (16 Ga.) .060″ (16 Ga.) 30, 36
Class IV .064″ (16 Ga.) .075″ (14 Ga.) 42, 48
Class IV .064″ (16 Ga.) .105″ (12 Ga.)
Class V .064″ (16 Ga.) .060″ (16 Ga.)
None 30, 36
Class V .064″ (16 Ga.) .075″ (14 Ga.)
None 42, 48
Class V .064″ (16 Ga.) .105″ (12 Ga.)
None

12, 18 .064″ (16 Ga.) .060″ (16 Ga.) 24 .064″ (16 Ga.) .075″ (14 Ga.) 30, 36 .064″ (16 Ga.) .105″ (12 Ga.) 42, 48 .079″ (14 Ga.) .135″ (10 Ga.) 1Corrugated polyethylene pipe. 2Polyvinyl chloride pipe. Solid wall or profile wall for diameters through 27 inches Profile wall for diameters larger than 27 inches. 3Polypropylene pipe, 12 inch to 30 inch diameters approved for Schedule A and
Schedule B, and 36 inch to 60 inch diameters approved for Schedule A only. 7-02.3
Construction Requirements
Culvert pipes shall be constructed in accordance with Section 7-08.3. 7-02.3(1)
Placing Culvert Pipe – General
A dike or plug of impervious material shall be placed near the intake end of the culvert pipe to prevent piping. The dike shall be 2 feet long and adequately surround the pipe to form an impervious barrier. When suitable impervious materials are not available at the site, suitable backfill shall be obtained as provided in Section 2-09.3(1)E.
The ends of the pipe or pipe arch shall be rigidly supported to prevent movement before and during the construction of end walls or headers.
Culvert pipes shall not be left extending beyond the staked limits unless approved by the
Engineer.
For pipes 30-inches and less in diameter, the ends shall be mitered in accordance with the
Standard Plans.

Page 7-4
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Culvert Pipe 7-02.3(2) 7-02
Installation of Metal End Sections
Metal end sections shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Standard
Plans, the Plans, and applicable portions of these Specifications.
When flared metal end sections are installed on concrete pipe, Design B end sections will be used on the inlet end only. Design C end sections will be used on the outlet ends only according to the following schedule: 7-02.3(3)
Concrete Pipe Nominal
Dia. in inches
End Section Nominal

12 15 18 24 24 30 30 36 36 42 42 48 48 60 54 66 60 72 66 78 72 84
Headwalls
If headwalls are specified in the Plans, they shall be constructed as soon as the embankment has been completed to a sufficient height over the Structure to allow the required Work. Headwalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable portions of
Section 6-02. 7-02.3(4)
Removing and Relaying Culvert Pipes
Where shown in the Plans or where designated by the Engineer, existing culvert pipes shall be removed and relaid in accordance with these Specifications. All culvert pipe damaged by the Contractor’s operations shall be replaced by the Contractor at no expense to the Contracting Agency. In the case of concrete pipe, all joints of the pipe before being relaid shall be cleaned so as to be free from all adhering material, including old mortar placed as a collar or seal in the original construction.
All culvert pipe sections removed and not relaid shall become the property of the
Contractor. 7-02.3(5)
Safety Bars for Culvert Pipe
When shown in the Plans, safety bars for culvert pipe shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard Plans and shall meet the requirements of Section 9-05.18. 7-02.4

Measurement
The length of culvert pipe or pipe arch will be the number of linear feet of completed installation measured along the invert.
Mitered end sections will be considered as part of the culvert pipe and shall be measured as culvert pipes.
Flared end sections will be measured by each completed end section.
The pipe connector section of end section Design A shall be fabricated as a part of the integral unit of the end section but will be measured as linear feet of pipe or pipe arch of the treatment, thickness and dimensions of pipe to which it is attached. If there is no Bid
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-5 7-02
Culvert Pipe item for pipe of the proper dimensions for the end sections, the pipe connector sections will be considered as part of the integral unit and will not be measured as pipe.
The length of safety bars for culvert pipe will be the number of linear feet of each safety bar installed.
Tapered end section with safety bars will be measured by the unit per each. 7-02.5

Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Schedule ____ Culv. Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Plain Conc. Culv. Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear feet. “Cl. ____ Reinf. Conc. Culv. Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Plain St. Culv. Pipe ____ In. Th. ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Tr. ____ St. Culv. Pipe ____ In. Th. ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Plain St. Culv. Pipe Arch ____ In. Th. ____ In. Span”, per linear foot. “Tr. ____ St. Culv. Pipe Arch ____ In. Th. ____ In. Span”, per linear foot. “Plain Nestable St. Pipe ____ In. Th. ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Tr. ____ Nestable St. Pipe ____ In. Th. ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Plain Al. Culv. Pipe ____ In. Th. ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Plain Al. Culv. Pipe Arch ____ In. Th. ____ In. Span”, per linear foot. “Relaying (type of Pipe and Size)”, per linear foot. “Solid Wall PVC Culv. Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Profile Wall PVC Culv. Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Corrugated Polyethylene Culv. Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “St. Rib Reinf Polyethylene Culv. Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Polypropylene Culvert Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot.
Where culvert pipes are to be removed but are not to be relaid, all costs in connection with the removal shall be included in the unit Contract price per cubic yard for “Structure Excavation Class B” or “Structure Excavation Class B Incl. Haul”. “Flared End Section ____ In. Diam.”, per each. “Flared End Section ____ In. Span”, per each. “Safety Bars for Culvert Pipe Type ____”, per linear foot. “Tapered End Sect. with Type ____ Safety Bars ____ In. Diam.”, per each.
Page 7-6
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Vacant 7-03 7-03
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 7-7 7-04
Storm Sewers 7-04
Storm Sewers 7-04.1
Description
This Work consists of constructing storm sewer lines in accordance with the Plans, these
Specifications, and the Standard Plans, as staked. 7-04.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Plain Concrete Storm Sewer Pipe
Reinforced Concrete Storm Sewer Pipe
Steel Spiral Rib Storm Sewer Pipe
Steel Storm Sewer Pipe
Aluminum Storm Sewer Pipe
Solid Wall PVC Storm Sewer Pipe
Profile Wall PVC Storm Sewer Pipe
Aluminum Spiral Rib Storm Sewer Pipe
Corrugated Polyethylene Storm Sewer Pipe
Steel Rib Reinforced Polyethylene Storm Sewer Pipe
High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe
Polypropylene Storm Sewer Pipe

9-05.7(1) 9-05.7(2) 9-05.9 9-05.10 9-05.11 9-05.12(1) 9-05.12(2) 9-05.17 9-05.20 9-05.22 9-05.23 9-05.24
Where steel or aluminum are referred to in this section in regard to a kind of storm sewer pipe, it shall be understood that steel is zinc coated (galvanized) or aluminum coated (aluminized) corrugated iron or steel and aluminum is corrugated aluminum alloy as specified in Sections 9-05.4 and 9-05.5.
Thermoplastic storm sewer pipe includes solid wall PVC storm sewer pipe, profile wall
PVC storm sewer pipe, corrugated polyethylene storm sewer pipe, and polypropylene storm sewer pipe.
Measurement for payment of the Bid items associated with the storm sewer installation will be based on the diameter of the storm sewer pipe described by the Bid item in the Plans.
It is not necessary that all storm sewer pipe on any one project be of the same kind of material. However, all contiguous pipe shall be of the same size, material, thickness, class, and treatment and shall be that required for the maximum height of cover.
When schedule A or B storm sewer pipe is specified in the Plans, the Contractor shall provide the specified schedule and diameter but has the option of furnishing any of the acceptable materials shown in the Storm Sewer Pipe Schedules Table. 7-04.3
Construction Requirements
Storm sewers shall be constructed in accordance with Section 7-08.3. 7-04.3(1)
Cleaning and Testing

7-04.3(1)A
General
The requirements of Section 7-17.3(2)A shall apply to storm sewers. 7-04.3(1)B
Exfiltration Test – Storm Sewers
Prior to making exfiltration leakage tests, the Contractor may fill the pipe with clear water to permit normal absorption into the pipe walls.
Leakage shall be no more than 1 gallon per hour per inch of diameter per 100 feet of storm sewer pipe, with a minimum test pressure of 6 feet of water column above the crown at the upper end of the pipe or above the active ground water table, whichever is higher as determined by the Engineer. The length of pipe tested shall be limited so that
Page 7-8
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Storm Sewers 7-04 the pressure on the invert of the lower end of the Section tested shall not exceed 16 feet of water column. For each increase in pressure of 2 feet above a basic 6 feet measured above the crown at the lower end of the test section, the allowable leakage shall be increased by 10 percent.
Storm Sewer Pipe Schedules
Aluminum 2⅔″ × ½″
Corr.
Steel3 2⅔″ × ½″ or Spiral
Rib

• Tr. 5 • Plain
With
Gasketed
Seams
Spiral Rib • Tr. 5 • Plain
12 Plain or Cl. IV SW or PW Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.)
18 Plain or Cl. IV SW or PW Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.)
24 Plain or Cl. IV SW or PW Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 30
Class III
PW

Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.075″ (14 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 36
Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.075″ (14 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 42
Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.105″ (12 Ga.) 0.075″ (14 Ga.) 48
Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.105″ (12 Ga.) 0.075″ (14 Ga.) 12
Class V
SW or PW Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 18
SW or PW Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 24
SW or PW Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 0.060″ (16 Ga.) 30
Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.075″ (14 Ga.) 0.075″ (14 Ga.) 36
PW

Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.075″ (14 Ga.) 0.105″ (12 Ga.) 42
Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.105″ (12 Ga.) 0.105″ (12 Ga.) 48
Allowed 0.064″ (16 Ga.) 0.105″ (12 Ga.) 0.105″ (12 Ga.)
Schedules Dia. (Fill Ht.) (In.)
A 2′ − 15′
B 15′ − 25′
Concrete
PVC1
PE2
PP4

1PVC = Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe, SW = Solid Wall PVC, PW = Profile Wall PVC 2PE = Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe 3Steel pipe options for either 2⅔″ × ½″ corrugations or spiral rib include: Tr. 5 galvanized,
Tr. 2 galvanized with gasketed seams, Tr. 5 aluminized, or plain aluminized with gasketed seams. 4PP = Polypropylene Pipe, 12 inch to 30 inch approved for Schedule A and Schedule B and 36 inch to 60 inch diameters approved for Schedule A only.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-9 7-04
Storm Sewers 7-04.3(1)C
Infiltration Test – Storm Sewers
Whenever the ground water table is above the crown of the higher end of the pipe section at the time of testing, an infiltration test may be performed in lieu of the exfiltration test upon written permission of the Engineer. The maximum allowable limit for infiltration shall be 0.8 gallon per hour per inch of diameter per 100 feet of length with no allowance for external hydrostatic head. 7-04.3(1)D
Other Test Allowances – Storm Sewers
Other allowances for infiltration and exfiltration tests shall be in accordance with
Section 7-17.3(2)D. 7-04.3(1)E

Low Pressure Air Test for Storm Sewers Constructed of Air Permeable
Materials
When air permeable pipe is subjected to a low-pressure air test, all of the provisions of
Section 7-17.3(2)E shall apply, except that the time in seconds for the pressure drop shall be equal to or greater than the required time as shown in the table below:
Time in Seconds for Pressure Drop
Pipe Length (ft)
Pipe
Dia. (in) 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 4 5 9 14 18 22 27 31 36 40 45 6 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 85 85 8 18 36 54 71 89 107 114 114 114 114 10 28 56 84 111 139 142 142 142 143 159 12 40 80 120 160 170 170 170 183 206 228 15 63 125 188 213 213 214 250 286 320 360 18 90 180 255 255 257 310 360 410 460 520 21 123 245 298 298 350 420 490 560 630 700 24 160 320 340 370 460 550 640 730 830 920 27 203 390 390 460 580 700 810 930 1040 1160 30 250 430 430 570 720 860 1000 1140 1290 1430
All time values listed in the table are in seconds. If a section to be tested includes more than one pipe size, the total time required can be found by adding the time values for each size of pipe and its corresponding length. Interpolate between valves for pipe lengths not shown.
Pipe over 30 inches in diameter shall be tested one joint at a time in accordance with
ASTM C1103. 7-04.3(1)F

Low Pressure Air Test for Storm Sewers Constructed of Non Air
Permeable Materials
When non air permeable pipe is subjected to a low-pressure air test, all of the provisions of Section 7-17.3(2)E shall apply, except that the time in seconds for the pressure drop shall be equal to or greater than four times the time shown in the table listed in
Section 7-04.3(1)E.
ASTM C1103.
Reaches of thermoplastic pipe containing no joints shall be exempt from testing requirements.
Page 7-10
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Storm Sewers 7-04.4 7-04
Measurement

The length of storm sewer pipe will be the number of linear feet of completed installation measured along the invert and will include the length through elbows, tees, and fittings.
The number of linear feet will be measured from the center of manhole to center of manhole or to the inside face of catch basins and similar type Structures.
The length of testing storm sewer pipe in conformance with Section 7-17.3(2)A will be the number of linear feet of completed installation actually tested. 7-04.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Plain Conc. Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Class ____ Reinf. Conc. Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Tr. ____ St. Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Th. ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Tr. ____ Al. Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Th. ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Solid Wall PVC Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Profile Wall PVC Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Corrugated Polyethylene Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Schedule ____ Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “St. Rib Reinf Polyethylene Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam”, per linear foot. “High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Polypropylene Storm Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for storm sewer pipe of the kind and size specified shall be full pay for all Work to complete the installation, including adjustment of inverts to manholes. “Testing Storm Sewer Pipe”, per linear foot.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-11

7-05
Manholes, Inlets, Catch Basins, and Drywells 7-05 7-05.1
Manholes, Inlets, Catch Basins, and Drywells
Description
This Work consists of constructing manholes, inlets, drywells, and catch basins and connecting to existing drainage structures of the types and sizes designated in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and the Standard Plans, in conformity with the lines and grades staked. 7-05.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Concrete
Crushed Surfacing Base Course
Gravel Backfill for Drywells
Rubber Gaskets
Flexible Plastic Gaskets
Metal Castings
Grate Inlets and Drop Inlets
Reinforcing Steel
Concrete Blocks
Concrete Brick
Precast Concrete Manhole
Precast Concrete Catch Basins
Precast Concrete Inlets
Precast Concrete Drywells
Underground Drainage Geotextile, Moderate Survivability
Mortar 7-05.3

6-02 9-03.9(3) 9-03.12(5) 9-04.4 9-04.5 9-05.15 9-05.16 9-07 9-12.1 9-12.2 9-05.50(2) 9-05.50(3) 9-05.50(4) 9-05.50(5) 9-33.1 9-20.4
Construction Requirements
The excavation for all manholes, inlets, and catch basins shall be sufficient to leave 1 foot in the clear between their outer surfaces and the earth bank.
The excavation for drywells shall be in accordance with the Standard Plans. The drywell and gravel backfill for drywell shall be completely encased in moderate survivability underground drainage geotextile in accordance with the Standard Plans and in conformance with Section 2-12.3. During construction of the drywell, all necessary precautions shall be taken to prevent debris and eroded material from entering the drywell.
The cover or grating of a manhole, catch basin, or inlet shall not be grouted to final grade until the final elevation of the pavement, gutter, ditch, or sidewalk in which it is to be placed has been established, and until permission thereafter is given by the Engineer to grout the cover or grating in place. Covers shall be seated properly to prevent rocking.
Leveling and adjustment devices that do not modify the structural integrity of the metal frame, grate or cover, and do not void the originating foundry’s compliance to these specifications and warranty are allowed. Leveling and adjusting devices that interfere with the backfilling, backfill density, grouting and asphalt density will not be allowed. The hardware for leveling and adjusting devices shall be completely removed when specified by the Engineer.
The channels in manholes shall conform accurately to the sewer grade.
Ladder rungs shall be grouted in the precast concrete walls. Rungs shall be uniformly spaced at 12 inches and be vertically aligned.
Page 7-12
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Manholes, Inlets, Catch Basins, and Drywells 7-05
In the event any pipe enters the manhole through the precast concrete units, the
Contractor shall make the necessary cut through the manhole wall and steel mesh. The steel shall be cut flush with the face of the concrete and shall be cut in such a manner that it will not loosen the reinforcement in the manhole wall.
The ends of all pipes shall be trimmed flush with the inside walls.
Rubber gaskets or flexible plastic gaskets may be used in tongue and groove joints of precast units. Joints between precast manhole units used for sanitary sewers shall be rubber gasketed. All other joints and all openings cut through the walls shall be grouted and watertight. Mortar shall conform to the requirements of Section 9-20.4(3).
If gaskets are used, handling of the precast units after the gasket has been affixed shall be done carefully to avoid disturbing or damaging the gasket or contaminating it with foreign material. Care shall be exercised to attain proper alignment before the joints are entirely forced home. During insertion of the tongue or spigot, the units shall be partially supported to minimize unequal lateral pressure on the gasket and to maintain concentricity until the gasket is properly positioned.
Rigid pipes connecting to sanitary sewer manholes shall be provided with a flexible joint at a distance from the face of the manhole of not more than 1½ times the nominal pipe diameter or 18 inches, whichever is greater.
Flexible pipes connecting to sanitary sewer manholes shall be provided with an entry coupling or gasket approved by the Engineer. No pipe joint in flexible pipe shall be placed within 10 feet of the manhole.
Backfilling around the Work will not be allowed until the concrete or mortar has thoroughly set.
Catch basins, manholes, and inlets shall be watertight.
Catch basin, grate inlet, and drop inlet connections to a sewer shall be so placed that the connecting pipe may be easily rodded over its entire length. After the connections are made, the Contractor shall rod all inlet and outlet pipes. All connections that cannot be successfully rodded shall be removed and new connections made.
Backfilling of manholes, inlets, catch basins, and drywells shall be done in accordance with the provisions of Section 2-09.
Manholes, catch basins, inlets, and drywells shall be constructed on a compacted or undisturbed level foundation. If the Contractor elects to use a separate cast-in-place base, basins, inlets, drywells, and other drainage Structures shall conform to the requirements of the Standard Plans except as approved by the Engineer.
Any shoring or extra excavation required shall meet the requirements of Section 2-09.3.
See Section 7-08 for pipe connection requirements. 7-05.3(1)

Adjusting Manholes and Catch Basins to Grade
Where shown in the Plans or where directed by the Engineer, the existing manholes, catch basins, or inlets shall be adjusted to the grade as staked or otherwise designated by the
Engineer.
The existing cast iron ring and cover on manholes and the catch basin and inlet frame and grate shall first be removed and thoroughly cleaned for reinstalling at the new elevation.
From that point, the existing Structure shall be raised or lowered to the required elevation.
The materials and method of construction shall conform to the requirements specified above, and the finished Structure shall conform to the requirements of the Standard Plans except as approved by the Engineer.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-13 7-05 7-05.3(2)
Manholes, Inlets, Catch Basins, and Drywells

Abandon Existing Manholes
Where it is required that an existing manhole be abandoned, the Structure shall be broken down to a depth of at least 4 feet below the revised surface elevation, all connections plugged, and the manhole filled with sand and compacted to 90 percent density as specified in Section 2-03.3(14)C. Debris resulting from breaking the upper part of the manhole may be mixed with the sand subject to the approval of the Engineer. The ring and cover shall be salvaged and all other surplus material disposed of. 7-05.3(3)
Connections to Existing Manholes
The Contractor shall verify invert elevations prior to construction. The crown elevation of laterals shall be the same as the crown elevation of the incoming pipe unless specified.
The existing base shall be reshaped to provide a channel equivalent to that specified for a new manhole.
The Contractor shall excavate completely around the manhole to prevent unbalanced loading. The manhole shall be kept in operation at all times and the necessary precautions shall be taken to prevent debris or other material from entering the sewer, including a tight pipeline bypass through the existing channel if required. Water used for flushing and testing shall not be allowed to enter the sewer.
All damage to the manhole resulting from the Contractor’s operation shall be repaired at no expense to the Contracting Agency. 7-05.3(4)
Drop Manhole Connection
Drop manhole connections shall be constructed in accordance with the Plans. One length of ductile iron pipe shall be provided outside the manhole. 7-05.4
Measurement

Manholes will be measured per each. In addition to the measurement per each, manholes in excess of 10 feet in height will be measured per linear foot for each additional foot of height over 10 feet. Measurement of manhole heights for payment purposes will be the distance from the flow line of the outlet pipe to the top of the manhole ring measured to the nearest foot.
Catch basins and inlets, will be measured per each.
Adjustment of manholes, catch basins, and inlets will be per each.
Structure excavation Class B and Structure excavation Class B including haul will be measured by the cubic yard as specified in Section 2-09.
Abandon existing manholes will be measured per each.
Connections to existing drainage structures will be measured per each.
Shoring or extra excavation will be measured as specified in Section 2-09.4.
Drop manhole connections will be measured per each.
Precast concrete drywell will be measured per each.
Page 7-14

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Manholes, Inlets, Catch Basins, and Drywells 7-05.5 7-05
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Manhole ____ In. Diam. Type ____”, per each. “Manhole Additional Height ____ In. Diam. Type ____”, per linear foot. “Catch Basin Type ____”, per each. “Catch Basin Type 2 ____ In. Diam.”, per each. “Grate Inlet Type ____”, per each. “Drop Inlet Type ____”, per each. “Concrete Inlet”, per each
All costs associated with furnishing and installing gravel backfill for bedding manholes, inlets and catch basins shall be included in the unit Contract price for the item installed. “Precast Concrete Drywell”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Precast Concrete Drywell” shall be full pay for furnishing and installing the drywell, including all Structure excavation, gravel backfill for drywell, crushed surfacing base course, and drainage geotextile. “Combination Inlet”, per each.
All costs associated with furnishing and installing gravel backfill for bedding manholes, inlets, and catch basins shall be in the unit Contract price for the item installed. “Adjust Manhole”, per each. “Adjust Catch Basin”, per each. “Adjust Inlet, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Adjust Manhole”, “Adjust Catch Basin”, or “Adjust Inlet” shall be full pay for all costs necessary to make the adjustment including restoration of adjacent areas in a manner acceptable to the Engineer. “Structure Excavation Class B”, per cubic yard. “Structure Excavation Class B Incl. Haul”, per cubic yard.
Structure excavation for concrete inlets is considered incidental to the cost of the inlets and shall be included in the unit Contract price for the concrete inlet. “Abandon Existing Manhole”, per each. “Connection to Drainage Structure”, per each.
All costs associated with connecting to an existing drainage structure shall be in the unit Contract price for each connection.
Payment for connections to existing pipes shall be included in the unit Contract prices for the drain, culvert, or storm sewer pipes. “Shoring or Extra Excavation Class B”, per square foot. “Drop Manhole Connection”, per each.
The price paid per drop connection is in addition to the price paid for manholes and for the specified sewer pipe that is replaced with ductile iron pipe.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-15 7-06 7-06
Page 7-16
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications Cleaning Existing Drainage Structures 7-07 7-07.1 7-07
Cleaning Existing Drainage Structures
Description
This Work consists of cleaning, removing, and disposing of all debris and obstructions from existing culvert pipes, storm sewer pipes, drains, inlet Structures, manholes, box culverts, grates, trash racks, or other drainage features within the limits of the project. 7-07.2 7-07.3
Construction Requirements

All pipes and drainage Structures that require cleaning are identified in the Plans. They shall be cleaned by flushing, rodding, or whatever means are necessary to provide unobstructed drainage. All catch basin sumps, manholes, inlet and outlet Structures, and debris racks shall also be freed of all dirt, rock, and debris. Existing drainage facilities shall be cleaned as a first order of Work to enhance natural drainage off and through the project. They shall be kept clean throughout the life of the project and be clean upon final acceptance of the Work.
Material to be removed shall be disposed of in the following manner: 1.
Structures specifically noted in the Contract that are suspected to contain contaminated sediment shall be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility. 2.
While performing the Work, if drainage water and/or soil appear oily, exhibit an unusual color or odor, or if staining or corrosion is observed, the Contractor shall stop work and immediately notify the Engineer. Additional work necessary in handling materials shall be in accordance with Section 1-04.4. 3.
If sediment and water from structures does not meet the conditions described in 1 or
2 above, material may be placed in an upland area with no possibility of surface runoff to waters of the State, including wetlands.
While performing the Work, the Contractor shall implement all necessary best management practices and measures to meet the conditions of Section 1-07.5. 7-07.4
Vacant 7-07.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when it is included in the Proposal: “Cleaning Existing Drainage Structure”, lump sum.
The lump sum Contract price for “Cleaning Existing Drainage Structure” shall be full pay for performing all Work as specified. In the event the Contract does not include a Bid item for cleaning existing drainage Structure, such Work, if required, shall be performed by the
Contractor in accordance with Section 1-04.4.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-17 7-08
General Pipe Installation Requirements 7-08
General Pipe Installation Requirements 7-08.1
Description
This Work includes installing culverts, storm sewers, and sanitary sewers. The Contractor shall also follow Section 7-02, 7-04, or 7-17 as it applies to the specific kind of Work. 7-08.2
Materials
Gravel Backfill for Foundations
Gravel Backfill for Pipe Zone Bedding 7-08.3

9-03.12(1) 9-03.12(3)
Construction Requirements 7-08.3(1)
Excavation and Preparation of Trench 7-08.3(1)A
Trenches
The length of trench excavation in advance of pipe laying shall be kept to a minimum.
Excavations shall either be closed up at the end of the day or protected per
Section 1-07.23(1).
The trench width shall be as specified in Section 2-09.4 and shall be excavated to the depth and grade as staked by the Engineer.
Trenches must be of sufficient width in the pipe zone to permit proper installation and bedding of the pipe and to provide the required compaction of backfill. Above the top of the pipe zone, the Contractor may excavate to any width.
All ledgerock, boulders, and stones shall be removed to provide a minimum of 6 inches clearance under all portions of the pipe.
Placement of bedding material shall precede the installation of all pipe. This shall include necessary leveling of the native trench bottom or the top of the foundation material as well as placement and compaction of required bedding material to a uniform grade so that the entire length of pipe will be supported on a uniformly dense unyielding foundation.
When, after excavating to the foundation level, the material remaining in the trench bottom is determined to be unsuitable by the Engineer, excavation shall be continued to such additional depth and width as required by the Engineer. Unsuitable foundation materials shall be disposed of at an approved site. The trench foundation shall be backfilled to the bottom of the pipe zone with gravel backfill for foundations, gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding, or other suitable material, and compacted to form a uniformly dense, unyielding foundation.
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench shall be maintained so that the toe of the slope is at least 2 feet from the edge of the trench. It shall be piled to cause a minimum of inconvenience to public travel, and provision shall be made for merging traffic where necessary. Free access shall be provided to all fire hydrants, water valves, and meters; and clearance shall be left to enable free flow of storm water in gutters, conduits, or natural watercourses.
If any part of the excavated material meets the Specifications of Section 9-03.12(3), the
Engineer may require that such material, in the quantity required, be selectively removed, stockpiled separately, and used as pipe bedding instead of quantities of gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding. If material so stockpiled becomes contaminated, the Contractor shall furnish suitable material in an amount equal to that lost by contamination at no expense to the Contracting Agency. All costs involved in storing, protecting, re-handling, and placing the material shall be included in other items of Work on the project.
Excavation for manholes and other Structures connected to the pipelines shall be sufficient to provide a minimum of 12 inches between their surfaces and the sides of the excavation.
Page 7-18

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 General Pipe Installation Requirements 7-08
The Contractor shall furnish, install, and operate all necessary equipment to keep excavations above the foundation level free from water during construction, and shall dewater and dispose of the water so as not to cause injury to public or private property or nuisance to the public. Sufficient pumping equipment in good working condition shall be available at all times for all emergencies, including power outage, and shall have available at all times competent workers for the operation of the pumping equipment.
Where pipe is to be placed in a new embankment, the embankment shall be constructed as shown in the Plans or as designated by the Engineer for a distance each side of the pipe location of not less than five times the diameter and to a minimum height equal to ½ of the outside diameter of the pipe. The embankment material shall be compacted to 95 percent of maximum density and the moisture content at the time of compaction shall be between optimum and 3 percentage points below optimum as determined by the Compaction Control Tests specified in Section 2-03.3(14)D. The trench shall then be excavated to a width as specified in Section 2-09.4, and the pipe installed in accordance with the Standard Plans. 7-08.3(1)B
Shoring
The Contractor shall provide all materials, labor, and equipment necessary to shore trenches to protect the Work, existing property, utilities, pavement, etc., and to provide safe working conditions in the trench. The Contractor may elect to use any combination of shoring and overbreak, tunneling, boring, sliding trench shield, or other method of accomplishing the Work consistent with applicable local, State, or Federal safety codes.
If workers enter any trench or other excavation 4 feet or more in depth that does not meet the open pit requirements of Section 2-09.3(3)B, it shall be shored. The Contractor alone shall be responsible for worker safety, and the Contracting Agency assumes no responsibility.
Upon completing the Work, the Contractor shall remove all shoring unless the Plans or the Engineer direct otherwise.
Shoring to be removed, or moveable trench shields or boxes, shall be located at least 2½ pipe diameters away from metal or thermoplastic pipe if the bottom of the shoring, shield, or box extends below the top of the pipe, unless a satisfactory means of reconsolidating the bedding or side support material disturbed by shoring removal can be demonstrated.
Damages resulting from improper shoring or failure to shore shall be the sole responsibility of the Contractor. 7-08.3(1)C

Bedding the Pipe
Pipe zone bedding material shall provide uniform support along the entire pipe barrel, without load concentration at joint collars or bells. All adjustment to line and grade shall be made by scraping away or filling in with bedding material under the body of the pipe and not by blocking or wedging. Bedding disturbed by pipe movement, or by removal of shoring movement of a trench shield or box, shall be reconsolidated prior to backfill.
Pipe zone bedding shall be as specified in the Standard Plans and shall be compacted to
90 percent maximum density. Bedding shall be placed, spread, and compacted before the pipe is installed so that the pipe is uniformly supported along the barrel. Lifts of not more than 6 inches in thickness shall be placed and compacted along the sides of the pipe to the height shown in the Standard Plans. Material shall be worked carefully under the pipe haunches and then compacted.
If the Engineer determines that the material existing in the bottom of the trench is satisfactory for bedding the pipe, the bedding material specified in the Standard Plans is not required, provided the existing material is loosened, regraded, and compacted to form a dense, unyielding base.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-19 7-08
General Pipe Installation Requirements 7-08.3(2)
Laying Pipe

7-08.3(2)A
Survey Line and Grade
Survey line and grade control hubs will be placed in a manner consistent with accepted practices.
The Contractor shall transfer line and grade into the trench where they shall be carried by means of a laser beam or taut grade line supported on firmly set batter boards at intervals of not more than 30 feet. Not less than three batter boards shall be in use at one time.
Grades shall be constantly checked and in the event the batter boards do not line up, the Work shall be immediately stopped, the Engineer notified, and the cause remedied before proceeding with the Work. Any other procedure shall have the written approval of the Engineer. 7-08.3(2)B
Pipe Laying – General
After an accurate grade line has been established, the pipe shall be laid in conformity with the established line and grade in the properly dewatered trench. Mud, silt, gravel, and other foreign material shall be kept out of the pipe and off the jointing surfaces.
All pipe laid in the trench to the specified line and grade shall be kept in longitudinal compression until the backfill has been compacted to the crown of the pipe. All pipe shall be laid to conform to the prescribed line and grade shown in the Plans, within the limits that follow.
Pipe shall be laid to a true line and grade at the invert of the pipe and the Contractor shall exercise care in matching pipe joints for concentricity and compatibility. In no case shall two pipes be joined together with ends having the maximum manufacturer’s tolerance.
The invert line may vary from the true line and grade within the limits stated to develop uniformity, concentricity, and uniform compression of jointing material provided such variance does not result in a reverse sloping invert. The limit of the variance at the invert shall not exceed plus or minus 0.03 feet at the time of backfill. Checking of the invert elevation of the pipe may be made by calculations from measurements on the top of the pipe.
The pipe, unless otherwise approved by the Engineer, shall be laid up grade from point of connection on the existing pipe or from a designated starting point. The pipe shall be installed with the bell end forward or upgrade. When pipe laying is not in progress, the forward end of the pipe shall be kept tightly closed with an approved temporary plug.
Where pipe joints must be deflected within the manufacturer’s recommended limits to accommodate required horizontal or vertical curvature, it shall first be joined in straight alignment and then deflected as required.
Where pipe joints must be deflected to an amount greater than the manufacturer’s recommended limits to accommodate required horizontal or vertical curvature, the curves shall be achieved with a series of tangents and shop fabricated bends, subject to the approval of the Engineer.
Upon final acceptance of the Work, all pipe and appurtenances shall be open, clean, and free draining. 7-08.3(2)C

Pipe Laying – Concrete
For concrete pipe with elliptical reinforcement, the markings indicating the minor axis of the reinforcement shall be placed in a vertical plane (top or bottom) when the pipe is laid.
Page 7-20
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 General Pipe Installation Requirements 7-08.3(2)D 7-08
Pipe Laying – Steel or Aluminum
Pipe with riveted or resistance spot welded seams shall be laid in the trench with the outside laps of circumferential joints upgrade and with longitudinal laps positioned other than in the invert, and firmly joined together with approved bands.
Aluminum pipe or pipe arch used in cement concrete shall be painted with two coats of paint. The paint shall cover all the surfaces in contact with the cement concrete and extend one inch beyond the point of contact. The aluminum pipe to be painted shall be cleaned with solvent to remove contaminants. After cleaning, the pipe shall be painted with two coats of paint conforming to Federal Specification TT-P-645 (primer, paint, zinc chromate, alkyd vehicle). Aluminized steel pipe will not require painting when placed in
Controlled Density Fill (CDF) or when in contact concrete head walls.
All costs of cleaning and painting the aluminum surfaces as specified shall be included in the unit Contract price per linear foot for the aluminum pipe or pipe arch. 7-08.3(2)E

Rubber Gasketed Joints
In laying pipe with rubber gaskets, the pipe shall be handled carefully to avoid knocking the gasket out of position or contaminating it with foreign material. Any gasket so disturbed shall be removed, cleaned, relubricated if required, and replaced before joining the sections.
The pipe shall be properly aligned before joints are forced home. Sufficient pressure shall be applied in making the joint to ensure that the joint is home, as defined in the standard installation instructions provided by the pipe manufacturer. The Contractor may use any method acceptable to the Engineer for pulling the pipe together, except that driving or ramming by hand or machinery will not be permitted. Any pipe damaged during joining and joint tightening shall be removed and replaced at no expense to the Contracting
Agency.
Care shall be taken to properly align the pipe before joints are entirely forced home.
During insertion of the tongue or spigot, the pipe shall be partially supported by hand, sling or crane to minimize unequal lateral pressure on the gasket and to maintain concentricity until the gasket is properly positioned. Since most gasketed joints tend to creep apart when the end of the pipe is deflected and straightened, such movement shall be held to a minimum once the joint is home.
Sufficient restraint shall be applied to the line to ensure that joints once home are held so by compacting backfill material under and alongside the pipe or by other acceptable means. At the end of the work day, the last pipe shall be blocked in such a manner as may be required to prevent creep. 7-08.3(2)F
Plugs and Connections
Plugs for pipe branches, stubs, or other open ends which are not to be immediately connected shall be made of an approved material and shall be secured in a place with a joint comparable to the main line joint, or stoppers may be of an integrally cast breakout design. 7-08.3(2)G
Jointing of Dissimilar Pipe

Dissimilar pipe shall be jointed by use of a factory-fabricated adapter coupling or a pipe collar as detailed in the Standard Plans.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-21 7-08 7-08.3(2)H
General Pipe Installation Requirements
Sewer Line Connections
Storm and sanitary sewer line connections to trunks, mains, laterals, or side sewers shall be left uncovered until after the Engineer has inspected and approved the Work. After approval of the connection, the trench shall be backfilled as specified. 7-08.3(2)I
Side Sewer Connections
Where a storm or sanitary side sewer is larger than the trunk, main, or lateral to which it is to be connected, the connection shall be made only at a standard manhole unless otherwise provided in the Plans or in the Special Provisions, or unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer. 7-08.3(3)
Backfilling

Placement of pipe zone backfill shall be performed in accordance with these requirements and the Standard Plans. Trenches shall be backfilled as soon after the pipe laying as possible.
Pipe zone backfill material shall be clean earth or sand, free from clay, frozen lumps, roots, or moisture in excess of that permitting required compaction. Rocks or lumps larger than
3 inches maximum shall not be used for pipe zone backfill.
Pipe zone backfill shall be placed in loose layers and compacted to 90 percent maximum density. Backfill shall be brought up simultaneously on each side of the pipe to the top of the pipe zone. The pipe shall then be covered to the top of the pipe zone and the materials compacted in a manner to avoid damaging or disturbing the completed pipe.
Backfill above the pipe zone shall be accomplished in such a manner that the pipe will not be shifted out of position nor damaged by impact or overloading. If pipe is being placed in a new embankment, backfill above the pipe zone shall be placed in accordance with
Section 2-03.3(14)C. If pipe is being placed under existing paved areas, or Roadways, backfill above the pipe zone shall be placed in horizontal layers no more than 6 inches thick and compacted to 95 percent maximum density. If pipe is being placed in non-traffic areas, backfill above the pipe zone shall be placed in horizontal layers no more than
6 inches thick and shall be compacted to 85 percent maximum density. All compaction shall be in accordance with the Compaction Control Test of Section 2-03.3(14)D, except in the case that 100% Recycled Concrete Aggregate is used. When 100% Recycled
Concrete Aggregate is used, the Contractor may submit a written request to use a test point evaluation for compaction acceptance. Test Point evaluation shall be performed in accordance with SOP 738. Material excavated from the trench shall be used for backfill above the pipe zone, except that organic material, frozen lumps, wood, rocks, or pavement chunks larger than 6 inches in maximum dimension shall not be used. Materials determined by the Engineer to be unsuitable for backfill at the time of excavation shall be removed and replaced with imported backfill material.
Backfilling of trenches in the vicinity of catch basins, manholes, or other appurtenances will not be permitted until the cement in the masonry has become thoroughly hardened.
When it is required that a blanket of select material or bank run gravel is to be placed on top of the native backfill, the backfill shall be placed to the elevations shown in the Plans, or to the elevations specified by the Engineer. Compaction of the native material shall be as required by the Contracting Agency and shall be performed prior to placing the select material. Surface material shall be loosened to whatever depth is required to prevent bridging of the top layer, but shall in no case be less than 18 inches.
The Contractor shall not operate tractors or other heavy equipment over the top of the pipe until the backfill has reached a height of 3 feet above the top of the pipe.

Page 7-22
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 General Pipe Installation Requirements 7-08.3(4) 7-08
Plugging Existing Pipe
Where shown in the Plans or where designated by the Engineer, existing pipes shall be plugged on the inlet end for a distance of 2 diameters with commercial concrete. Care shall be used in placing the concrete in the pipe to see that the opening of the pipe is completely filled and thoroughly plugged. 7-08.4
Measurement
Gravel backfill for foundations, or gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding when included in the Proposal, shall be measured by the cubic yard, including haul, as specified in
Section 2-09.
Plugging pipes will be measured per each, for each plug installed, for pipe diameters up to and including 36 inches. The concrete for plugging pipes in excess of 36 inches in diameter will be measured by the cubic yard. Computations for corrugated metal pipes will be based on the nominal diameter.
Excavation of the trench will be measured as Structure excavation Class B or Structure excavation Class B including haul, by the cubic yard as specified in Section 2-09. When excavation below grade is necessary, excavation will be measured to the limits ordered by the Engineer.
Embankment construction before pipe placement under the applicable provisions of
Section 7-08.3(1)A will be measured in accordance with Section 2-03.
Shoring or extra excavation class B will be measured as specified in Section 2-09.4. 7-08.5

Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Gravel Backfill for Foundations Class ____”, per cubic yard. “Gravel Backfill for Pipe Zone Bedding”, per cubic yard.
All costs associated with furnishing and installing bedding and backfill material within the pipe zone in the installation of culvert, storm sewer, and sanitary sewer pipes shall be included in the unit Contract price for the type and size of pipe installed. “Plugging Existing Pipe”, per each. “Commercial Concrete”, per cubic yard. “Structure Excavation Class B”, per cubic yard. “Structure Excavation Class B Incl. Haul”, per cubic yard. “Shoring or Extra Excavation Class B”, per square foot.
All costs in jointing dissimilar pipe with a coupling or concrete collar shall be included in the unit Contract price per foot for the size and type of pipe being jointed.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-23 7-09
Water Mains 7-09
Water Mains

7-09.1
Description
This Work consists of constructing water mains 16 inches in diameter and smaller in accordance with the Plans, these Standard Specifications, the Special Provisions and the
Standard Plans, at the location shown on the Plans. 7-09.1(1)
Definitions 7-09.1(1)A
Trench Widths
Trench width is from trench wall to trench wall, outside of shoring. 7-09.1(1)B
Unsuitable Material
Material removed because it is unsatisfactory for foundations is defined as unsuitable foundation material.
Material removed in trenching which is unsuitable for replacement in the backfill is defined as unsuitable backfill material. 7-09.1(1)C

Gravel Backfill for Pipe Zone Bedding
Gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding is the method or material used to transmit load from the pipe into the foundation or into the sidewall support. 7-09.1(1)D
Pipe Zone Backfill
Pipe zone backfill includes material placed above the gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding up to the depths shown on the Standard Plans. 7-09.1(1)E
Trench Backfill
Trench backfill includes materials placed above the pipe zone backfill. Trench backfill within the Roadway prism shall extend up to the underside of the pavement or surfacing materials. Trench backfill outside the Roadway prism shall extend up to original ground or finished grade. 7-09.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Pipe for main line:
Ductile Iron Pipe
Steel Pipe (6 inches and over)
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe (4 inches and over)
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe (under 4 inches)
Polyethylene (PE) Pressure Pipe (4 inches and over)
Fittings for Main Lines:
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe (4 inches and over)
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe (under 4 inches)
Restrained Joints
Bolted, Sleeve-Type Couplings for Plain End Pipe
Restrained Flexible Couplings
Grooved and Shouldered Joints
Polyethylene (PE) Pipe (4 inches and over)
Fabricated Steel Mechanical Slip-Type Expansion Joints

Page 7-24 9-30.1 9-30.1(1) 9-30.1(4)A 9-30.1(5)A 9-30.1(5)B 9-30.1(6) 9-30.2 9-30.2(1) 9-30.2(4)A 9-30.2(5)A 9-30.2(5)B 9-30.2(6) 9-30.2(7) 9-30.2(8) 9-30.2(9) 9-30.2(10) 9-30.2(11)
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Water Mains 7-09
Appurtenances:
Concrete Blocking
Detectable Marking Tape
Blow Off Assemblies
Polyethylene Encasement
Steel Pipe (4 inches and under)
Fittings for Steel Pipe (4 inches and under)
Aggregates:
Foundation Material
Gravel Backfill for Pipe Zone Bedding
Pipe Zone Backfill
Trench Backfill

6-02.3(2)B 9-15.18 9-30.1, 9-30.2, 9-30.3, 9-30.6 9-30.1(2) 9-30.1(4)B 9-30.2(4)B 9-03.17, 9-03.18 9-03.12(3) 9-03.19 9-03.15 or 9-03.19
It is not intended that materials listed herein are to be necessarily considered equal or generally interchangeable for all applications. Those suitable for the project shall be specified in the Special Provisions or shown on the Plans.
The pipe manufacturer shall test all pipe and fittings as required by these Standard
Specifications and the standards referenced. The Contractor shall submit Type 1 Working
Drawings consisting of all test results from the pipe manufacturer including a written certification that material to be delivered is represented by the samples tested and that such delivered materials meet or exceed the specified requirements. No pipe shall be delivered until test results and certifications are in the hands of the Engineer.
The Engineer shall have free access to all testing and records pertaining to material to be delivered to the job site. The Engineer may elect to be present at any or all material testing operations.
The basis of acceptance shall be a certificate of compliance as described in Section 1-06.3, accompanied by two copies of pressure test results of the pipe or fittings involved. 7-09.3 7-09.3(1)
Construction Requirements
General
Trench excavation required for the installation of water mains and appurtenances shall be unclassified. Material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in a Roadway or public thoroughfare shall be piled and maintained so that the toe of the slope of the spoil material is at least 2 feet from the edge of the trench. It shall be piled in a manner to prevent surface water from flowing into the excavation and in a manner that will cause a minimum of inconvenience to public travel. Free access shall be provided to all fire hydrants, water valves, and meters; and clearance shall be left to enable the free flow of storm water in gutters, conduits, and natural watercourses. 7-09.3(2)

Ungraded Streets
On ungraded streets, when grading is not called for in the Contract, the depth of trench excavation shall be as shown on the Plans and as staked.
Where the Plans show the pipe is to be laid above the existing ground surface, an embankment fill shall be made and compacted to conform with the section shown on the Plans, and the water main trench shall be excavated therein. That portion of the embankment below the bottom of the pipe shall be compacted with rollers or mechanical compactors under controlled moisture conditions as required under Method B of
Section 2-03.3(14)C.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-25 7-09 7-09.3(3)
Water Mains
Clearing and Grubbing in Ungraded Streets
On ungraded streets, where clearing and grubbing is not called for in the Contract, the area to be excavated or filled shall be cleared and grubbed by the Contractor. This
Work shall consist of the removal and disposal of logs, stumps, roots, brush, and other refuse within 5 feet of the centerline of the pipe. Such material shall be disposed of in accordance with the Special Provisions. 7-09.3(4)

Removal of Existing Street Improvements
Removal of existing street improvements and pavement from driveways and sidewalks shall be performed as specified in Section 2-02. Stockpiling of waste materials along the trench shall not be allowed. 7-09.3(5)
Grade and Alignment
The location of blow off assemblies and combination air release/air vacuum valves are shown on the Plans.
The Contractor shall verify the locations and establish the depth of the existing water mains at the points where connections are to be made prior to trenching for the pipelines.
The profile shall be adjusted so no new high spots or low spots are created between the connection points to the existing water mains.
The depth of trenching for water mains shall be such as to give a minimum cover of
36 inches over the top of the pipe unless otherwise specified in the Special Provisions.
Deeper excavation may be required due to localized breaks in grade, or to install the new main under existing culverts or other utilities where necessary. Where the profile of the pipeline and the ground surface is shown on the Plans, the pipeline shall be laid to the elevation shown regardless of depth. The excavation shall be to such depth that the minimum cover over valve operating nuts shall be 1 foot. 7-09.3(6)
Existing Utilities

Existing utilities of record, except services, are shown on the Plans. These are shown for convenience only, and the Engineer assumes no responsibility for improper locations or failure to show utility locations on the Plans.
When utility services occupy the same space as the new water main, the Contractor shall complete necessary excavation to fully expose such services. The Contractor shall protect said services, and work around them during excavating and pipe laying operations. Any damages to services resulting from the Contractor’s operation shall be reported to the appropriate utility. Such damage shall be repaired at the Contractor’s expense. 7-09.3(7)
Trench Excavation
The Contractor shall perform excavation of every description and in whatever materials encountered to the depth indicated on the Plans or specified in the Special Provisions.
Excavations shall be made by open cut unless otherwise provided for. Trenches shall be excavated to true and smooth bottom grades and in accordance with the lines given by the Engineer or shown on the Plans. The trench bottom shall provide uniform bearing and support for each length of pipe.
Bell holes shall be excavated to the extent necessary to permit accurate Work in making and inspecting the joints. The banks of the trenches shall be kept as nearly vertical as soil conditions will permit, and where required to control trench width or to protect adjacent
Structures, the trench shall be sheeted and braced. Trench widths to 1 foot above the top of the pipe shall not exceed 30 inches maximum or 1½ times the outside diameter of the pipe plus 18 inches whichever is greater. Standard excavating equipment shall be adjusted so as to excavate the narrowest trench possible.
Page 7-26
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Water Mains 7-09
The length of trench excavation in advance of pipe laying shall be kept to a minimum.
Excavations shall be either closed up at the end of the day or protected per
Section 1-07.23(1).
The Contractor shall exercise sound engineering and construction practices in excavating the trench and maintaining the trench so that no damage will occur to any foundation,
Structure, pole line, pipe line, or other facility because of slough or slopes, or from any other cause. If, as a result of the excavation, there is disturbance of the ground, which may endanger other property, the Contractor shall immediately take remedial action at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. No act, representation, or instruction of the Engineer shall in any way relieve the Contractor from liability for damages or costs that result from trench excavation.
Care shall be taken not to excavate below the depth specified. Excavation below that depth shall be backfilled with foundation material and compacted as specified herein.
If workers have to enter any trench or other excavation 4 feet or more in depth that does not meet the open pit requirements of Section 2-09.3(3)B, it shall be shored. The
Contractor alone shall be responsible for worker safety, and the Contracting Agency assumes no responsibility.
Upon completing the Work, the Contractor shall remove all shoring unless the Plans or the Engineer direct otherwise. 7-09.3(7)A

Dewatering of Trench
Where water is encountered in the trench, it shall be removed during pipe-laying operations and the trench so maintained until the ends of the pipe are sealed and provisions are made to prevent floating of the pipe. Trench water or other deleterious materials shall not be allowed to enter the pipe at any time. 7-09.3(7)B
Rock Excavation
Rock excavation shall cover the removal and disposal of rock that requires systematic drilling and blasting for its removal, and also boulders exceeding ½ cubic yard. Ledge rock, boulders, or stones shall be removed to provide a minimum clearance of 4 inches under the pipe.
Hardpan, hard clay, glacial till, sandstone, siltstone, shale, or other sedimentary rocks, which are soft, weathered, or extensively fissured will not be classified as rock excavation.
Rock is defined as one that has a modulus of elasticity of more than 200,000 psi or unconfined compressive strength at field moisture content of more than 2,000 psi.
Materials removed shall be replaced with gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding, pipe zone backfill or trench backfill as designated by the Engineer. 7-09.3(7)C
Extra Trench Excavation
Changes in grades of the water main from those shown on the Plans, or as provided in the
Special Provisions, may be necessary because of unexpected utilities, or for other reasons.
If, in the opinion of the Engineer, it is necessary to adjust, correct, relocate, or in any way change the line and grade, such changes shall be made by the Contractor under the terms of these Standard Specifications.
When pipeline grade is lowered in excess of 1 foot below the grade indicated on the
Plans, the Contractor shall make such extra excavation as necessary.
When the pipeline horizontal alignment is changed by more than 1 foot from the line indicated on the Plans, after the trench has been excavated, the Contractor shall excavate the trench at the changed location and backfill and compact the previous trench.
Additional excavation so required will be classified as extra trench excavation.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-27 7-09 7-09.3(8)
Water Mains
Removal and Replacement of Unsuitable Materials
Whenever in excavating the trench for water mains, the bottom of the trench exposes peat, soft clay, quicksand, or other unsuitable foundation material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the Engineer and backfilled with foundation material.
When determined by the Engineer that silty soils or fine sandy soils are encountered,
Class C foundation material shall be required. Silty soils or fine sandy soils usually flow in the presence of a stream of water. When determined by the Engineer that clay, peat, or other soft materials are encountered that become saturated with water, but do not break down into fine particles and flow, Class A or Class B foundation material shall be required.
Material removed from the trench that is unsuitable for trench backfill shall be removed and hauled to a waste site. If material is not available within the limits of the project for backfilling the trench, the Contractor shall furnish trench backfill meeting the requirements of Section 9-03.12(3) or 9-03.19 as required.
Unsuitable material shall be loaded directly into trucks and hauled to a waste site obtained by the Contractor. Stockpiling of unsuitable material at the project site shall not be allowed. 7-09.3(9)

Bedding the Pipe
Gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding shall be select granular material free from wood waste, organic material, and other extraneous or objectionable materials and shall have a maximum dimension of 1½ inches. Gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding shall be placed to the depths shown in the Standard Plans. Gravel backfill for pipe zone bedding shall be rammed and tamped around the pipe to 95 percent of maximum density by approved hand-held tools, so as to provide firm and uniform support for the full length of the pipe, valves, and fittings. Care shall be taken to prevent any damage to the pipe or its protective coating. 7-09.3(10)
Backfilling Trenches
Prior to backfilling, form lumber and debris shall be removed from the trench. Sheeting used by the Contractor shall be removed just ahead of the backfilling.
Backfill up to 12 inches over the top of the pipe shall be evenly and carefully placed.
Materials capable of damaging the pipe or its coating shall be removed from the backfill material. The remainder of the material shall be placed by dumping into the trench by any method at the option of the Contractor, and shall be compacted as specified hereinafter.
A minimum 3 inch sand cushion shall be placed between the water main and existing pipelines or other conduits when encountered during construction. 7-09.3(11)
Compaction of Backfill
Backfill shall be compacted to at least 95 percent of maximum density as specified in
Section 2-03.3(14)D.
At locations where paved streets, Roadway Shoulders, driveways, or sidewalks will be constructed or reconstructed over the trench, the backfill shall be spread in layers and be compacted by mechanical tampers. In such cases, the backfill material shall be placed in successive layers not exceeding 6 inches in loose thickness, and each layer shall be compacted with mechanical tampers to the density specified herein. Mechanical tampers shall be of the impact type as approved by the Engineer.

Page 7-28
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Water Mains 7-09.3(12) 7-09
General Pipe Installation
Pipe shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s printed Specifications and instructions, and to the standards of the AWWA for installing the type of pipe used. The
Contractor shall provide tools and equipment, including any special tools required for installing each particular type of pipe used.
Short lengths of pipe supplied by the manufacturer shall be used whenever possible to provide the proper spacing of valves, tees, or special fittings. 7-09.3(13)
Handling of Pipe
Pipe shall be handled in a manner that will prevent damage to the pipe, pipe lining, or coating. Pipe and fittings shall be loaded and unloaded using hoists and slings in a manner to avoid shock or damage, and under no circumstances shall they be dropped, skidded, or rolled against other pipe. If any part of the coating or lining is damaged, repair thereof shall be made by the Contractor at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency and in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer. Damaged pipe shall be rejected, and the Contractor shall immediately place damaged pipe apart from the undamaged and shall remove the damaged pipe from the site within 24 hours.
Threaded pipe ends shall be protected by couplings or other means until laid.
Pipe and fittings shall be inspected for defects.
Dirt or other foreign material shall be prevented from entering the pipe or pipe joint during handling or laying operations, and any pipe or fitting that has been installed with dirt or foreign material in it shall be removed, cleaned, and re-laid. At times when pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of the pipe shall be closed by a watertight plug or by other means approved by the Engineer to ensure cleanliness inside the pipe. 7-09.3(14)

Cutting Pipe
Whenever it becomes necessary to cut a length of pipe, the cut shall be made by abrasive saw or by a special pipe cutter. Pipe ends shall be square with the longitudinal axis of the pipe and shall be reamed and otherwise smoothed so that good connections can be made.
Threads shall be cleanly cut. Oxyacetylene torch cutting of ductile iron pipe shall not be allowed. 7-09.3(15)
Laying of Pipe on Curves 7-09.3(15)A
Ductile Iron Pipe
Long radius curves, either horizontal or vertical, may be laid with standard pipe lengths by deflecting the joints. If the pipe is shown curved on the Plans and no special fittings are shown, the Contractor can assume that the curves can be made by deflecting the joints with standard lengths of pipe. If shorter lengths are required, the Plans will indicate maximum lengths that can be used. The amount of deflection at each pipe joint when pipe is laid on a horizontal or vertical curve shall not exceed the manufacturer’s printed recommended deflections.
Where field conditions require deflection or curves not anticipated by the Plans, the
Engineer will determine the methods to be used. No additional payment will be made for laying pipe on curves as shown on the Plans, or for field changes involving standard lengths of pipe deflected at the joints. When special fittings not shown on the Plans are required to meet field conditions, additional payment will be made for special fittings as provided in Section 1-09.6.
When rubber gasketed pipe is laid on a curve, the pipe shall be jointed in a straight alignment and then deflected to the curved alignment. Trenches shall be made wider on curves for this purpose.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 7-29 7-09 7-09.3(15)B
Water Mains
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe (4 inches and Over)
PVC pipe may be bent to allow for slight changes in direction. The minimum bending radius shall be as follows:
Size
Minimum Bending Radius
4 inch
125 feet
6 inch

175 feet
8 inch
225 feet
10 inch
275 feet
12 inch
325 feet
14 inch
400 feet
Axial deflection at the pipe joints shall not be allowed.
For 16-inch diameter pipe, changes in direction may be accomplished by axial deflection of the pipe joint. The maximum axial deflection allowed at each joint is 1 degree. For changes in direction greater than 1 degree per pipe joint, fittings shall be used. 7-09.3(16)

Cleaning and Assembling Joint
The pipe ends, couplings, fittings, and appurtenances shall be cleaned to remove oil, grit, or other foreign matter from the joint. Care shall be taken to keep the joint from contacting the ground.
Pipe not furnished with a depth mark shall be marked before assembly to ensure visual observation of the Work. 7-09.3(17)
Laying Ductile Iron Pipe With Polyethylene Encasement
Where shown on the Plans, the Contractor shall lay ductile iron pipe with a polyethylene encasement. Pipe and polyethylene encasement shall be installed in accordance with
AWWA C105. 7-09.3(18)
Coupled Pipe 4 inches in Diameter and Larger
Joints for steel pipe shall be bell and spigot or welded as specified in the Special
Provisions.
Component parts of couplings, rings, and bells shall receive a protective coating in the same manner as specified for the steel pipe. Bolts and nuts, exposed edges, and flanges shall, after installation, be covered with coal-tar protective coating conforming to AWWA
C203 or other coating approved by the Engineer.
Steel pipe 4 inches and larger for aboveground service shall be coupled with flanges, compression type or grooved type couplings.
Pipe for outdoor service above ground shall be protected with a coal-tar protective coating conforming to AWWA C203 or other coating approved by the Engineer. 7-09.3(19)

Connections 7-09.3(19)A
Connections to Existing Mains
Connections to the existing water main shall not be made without first making the necessary scheduling arrangements with the Engineer in advance. Work shall not be started until all the materials, equipment, and labor necessary to properly complete the
Work are assembled on the site.
Existing water mains shall be cut by the Contractor unless otherwise specified in the
Special Provisions. The Contractor shall remove the portions of pipe to provide for the installation of the required fittings at the points of connection. Damage caused by the
Contractor’s operations to existing joints in piping to remain in-service shall be repaired
Page 7-30
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Water Mains 7-09 by the Contractor at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. The Contractor shall determine the exact length of the existing water main that must be removed. The pipe ends shall be beveled to prevent damage to the transition coupling gasket during installation of the coupling. The exterior of the existing pipe end shall be cleaned to a sound, smooth finish before installation of the coupling.
Transition couplings shall be installed by the Contractor and shall be provided with a plastic film wrap. The plastic film wrap shall be wrapped loosely around the pipe, fittings, and couplings, and secured with 2-inch-wide polyethylene adhesive tape. Pipelines in which the couplings are installed shall be wrapped a minimum of 3 feet on each side of the coupling. Joints or seams in the plastic film wrap shall be made using the 2-inchwide polyethylene adhesive tape. The plastic film wrap need not be watertight, but no part of the pipe or coupling shall be exposed to the backfill. Care shall be exercised during backfilling to prevent the plastic film wrap from being punctured or otherwise damaged. Plastic film wrap and its installation shall conform to AWWA C105 except as modified herein.
Once Work is started on a connection, it shall proceed continuously without interruption and as rapidly as possible until completed. No shutoff of mains will be permitted overnight, over weekends, or on holidays.
If the connection to the existing system involves turning off the water, the Contractor shall be responsible for notifying the residents affected by the shutoff. The Engineer will advise which property owners are to be notified.
The Contractor may be required to perform the connection during times other than normal working hours. The Contractor shall not operate any valves on the existing system without specific permission of the Engineer.
The types of connections are varied and suggested piping arrangements have been shown on the Plans. For the installation of these connections, the surfaced portion of the Roadway shall not be penetrated unless the connecting point is directly under it.
For connection by any other method, the Contractor shall furnish a detailed sketch for approval not less than 2 weeks prior to the expected construction. 7-09.3(19)B
Maintaining Service
Where existing services are to be transferred from old to new mains, the Contractor shall plan and coordinate its Work with that of the Utility so that service will be resumed with the least possible inconvenience to customers.
To supply customers with water during the construction of a water main project where any section of the pipe has passed satisfactory hydrostatic and bacteriological tests, the Utility reserves the right to tap corporation stops into the section of new pipe and install service connections at such locations as the Utility may elect. The installation of any such service connections by the Utility shall not be construed by the Contractor as an acceptance by the Contracting Agency of any part of the Work required under the Contract. 7-09.3(20)

Detectable Marking Tape
Detectable marking tape shall be installed over nonmetallic water lines including services lines. The tape shall be placed approximately 1 foot above the top of the line and shall extend its full length. Detectable marking tape shall meet the requirements of
Section 9-15.18. 7-09.3(21)
Concrete Thrust Blocking
Concrete thrust blocking, as detailed on the Plans, shall be placed at bends, tees, dead ends, and crosses. Blocking shall be commercial concrete meeting the requirement of
Section 6-02.3(2)B poured in place.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-31 7-09
Water Mains

Concrete blocking shall bear against solid undisturbed earth at the sides and bottom of the trench excavation and shall be shaped so as not to obstruct access to the joints of the pipe or fittings. 7-09.3(22)
Blowoff Assemblies
Blowoff Assemblies shall be constructed at the locations shown on the Plans and in accordance with the Standard Plans. 7-09.3(23)
Hydrostatic Pressure Test
Water main appurtenances and service connections to the meter setter shall be tested in sections of convenient length under a hydrostatic pressure equal to 150 psi in excess of that under which they will operate or in no case shall the test pressure be less than 225 psi. Pumps, gauges, plugs, saddles, corporation stops, miscellaneous hose and piping, and measuring equipment necessary for performing the test shall be furnished and operated by the Contractor.
Sections to be tested shall normally be limited to 1,500 feet. The Engineer may require that the first section of pipe, not less than 1,000 feet in length, installed by each of the
Contractor’s crews, be tested in order to qualify the crew and the materials. Pipe laying shall not be continued more than an additional 1,000 feet until the first section has been tested successfully.
The pipeline shall be backfilled sufficiently to prevent movement of the pipe under pressure. Thrust blocks shall be in place and time allowed for the concrete to cure before testing. Where permanent blocking is not required, the Contractor shall furnish and install temporary blocking and remove it after testing.
The mains shall be filled with water and allowed to stand under pressure a sufficient length of time to allow the escape of air and allow the lining of the pipe to absorb water.
The Contracting Agency will furnish the water necessary to fill the pipelines for testing purposes at a time of day when sufficient quantities of water are available for normal system operation.
The test shall be accomplished by pumping the main up to the required pressure, stopping the pump for 15 minutes, and then pumping the main up to the test pressure again.
During the test, the section being tested shall be observed to detect any visible leakage.
A clean container shall be used for holding water for pumping up pressure on the main being tested. This makeup water shall be sterilized by the addition of chlorine to a concentration of 50 mg/l.
The quantity of water required to restore the pressure shall be accurately determined by pumping through a positive displacement water meter. The meter shall be approved by the Engineer. Acceptability of the test will be determined as follows:

L=
SD P 266,400
The quantity of water lost from the main shall not exceed the number of gallons per hour as determined by the formula:
Where:
L
D
P
S = = = = allowable leakage, gallons/hour nominal diameter of the pipe in inches test pressure during the leakage test (psi) gross length of pipe tested, feet
There shall not be an appreciable or abrupt loss in pressure during the 15-minute test period.
Page 7-32

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Water Mains 7-09
Pressure gauges used in the test shall be accompanied with certifications of accuracy from a testing Laboratory approved by the Engineer.
Any visible leakage detected shall be corrected by the Contractor regardless of the allowable leakage specified above. Should the tested section fail to meet the pressure test successfully as specified, the Contractor shall, at no additional expense to the Contracting
Agency, locate and repair the defects and then retest the pipeline.
Tests shall be made with the hydrant auxiliary gate valves open and pressure against the hydrant valve. Each valve shall be tested by closing each in turn and relieving the pressure beyond. This test of the valve will be acceptable if there is no immediate loss of pressure on the gauge when the pressure comes against the valve being checked. The Contractor shall verify that the pressure differential across the valve does not exceed the rated working pressure of the valve.
Prior to calling out the Engineer to witness the pressure test, the Contractor shall have all equipment set up completely ready for operation and shall have successfully performed the test to ensure that the pipe is in satisfactory condition.
Defective materials or Work, discovered as a result of hydrostatic field test, shall be replaced by the Contractor at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. Whenever it is necessary to replace defective material or correct the Work, the hydrostatic test shall be re-run at the Contractor’s expense until a satisfactory test is obtained. 7-09.3(23)A
Testing Extensions From Existing Mains
When an existing water main is extended with new pipe to a new valve and the distance from the existing pipe to the new valve is 18 feet or less, the section of new pipe installed between the new valve and the end of the existing main shall be made with pretested, prechlorinated pipe, and no hydrostatic test will be required. When the required hydrostatic tests are conducted in the new main section beyond the installed new valve in the closed position, the normal pressure of the existing main may be present against the other side of the new valve.
Where the distance between the end of an existing water main pipe extension to the new valve is more than 18 feet, the connection of the new pipe to existing pipe shall not be made until after hydrostatic tests have been made to the required pressure in both directions against the new valve. This shall be accomplished by a temporary cap or plug installed on the end of the new pipe, beyond the new valve, as close as possible to the existing pipe for testing purposes.
The short length of pipe between the temporary cap or plug end with the new valve in the closed position, with no hydrostatic pressure active on the opposite side of the valve, shall be subjected to the required test pressure. The same test shall be made against the other side of the new valve when that section of pipe is tested with no hydrostatic pressure active in the short section of pipe toward the existing main. The final connection to the existing main shall be made with pretested prechlorinated pipe. 7-09.3(23)B

Testing Section With Hydrants Installed
When hydrants are included with the section of main pipe to be tested, the testing shall be conducted in three separate tests as follows:
Test No. 1 – Water main gate valves and hydrant auxiliary gate valves closed, with the hydrant operating stem valves and hose ports wide open.
Test No. 2 – Water main gate valves and the hydrant operating the stem valves tightly closed but the hydrant auxiliary gate valves and hose ports wide open.
Test No. 3 – Each hydrant shall be tested to the pressure indicated in Section 7-09.3(23) with the hydrant auxiliary gate valve and hose ports closed and the hydrant operating stem valve wide open.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-33 7-09 7-09.3(23)C
Water Mains
Testing Hydrants Installed on Existing Mains

For hydrants installed and connected to an existing main, the hydrant connection including hydrant tee, connection pipe, and auxiliary gate valves, shall be installed with pretested materials.
Before the hydrant connection is made to the existing main, the hydrant installation shall be subjected to the hydrostatic Test No. 3 as specified in Section 7-09.3(23)B. Hydrants installed and connected to an existing main shall have a satisfactory bacteriological sample obtained following the hydrostatic test. 7-09.3(24)
Disinfection of Water Mains
Before being placed into service, new water mains and repaired portions of, or extensions to, existing mains shall be chlorinated and a satisfactory bacteriological report obtained. In the event two unsatisfactory bacteriological reports are obtained on a section of pipe, the
Contractor shall revise his method of disinfection and the form of applied chlorine. 7-09.3(24)A
Flushing
Sections of pipe to be disinfected shall first be flushed to remove any solids or contaminated material that may have become lodged in the pipe. If a hydrant is not installed at the end of the main, then a tap shall be provided large enough to develop a flow velocity of at least 2.5 fps in the water main.
Taps required by the Contractor for temporary or permanent release of air, chlorination or flushing purposes shall be provided by the Contractor as part of the construction of water mains.
Where dry calcium hypochlorite is used for disinfection of the pipe, flushing shall be done after disinfection.
The Contractor shall be responsible for disposal of treated water flushed from mains and shall neutralize the wastewater for protection of aquatic life in the receiving water before disposal into any natural drainage channel, i.e., receiving water, waters of the
State, including wetlands. The Contractor shall be responsible for disposing of disinfecting solution to the satisfaction of the Contracting Agency and local authorities. At a minimum, chlorinated water shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 parts per million (ppm) or less, and pH adjustment to within 6.5 – 8.5 standard units before discharging to surface waters of the State or to a storm sewer system that drains to surface waters of the State.
If approved by the Engineer and by the local authority responsible for the sanitary sewer system, disposal of treated water from mains may be made to an available sanitary sewer, provided the rate of disposal will not overload the sewer. 7-09.3(24)B

Requirement of Chlorine
Before being placed into service, new mains and repaired portions of, or extensions to, existing mains shall be chlorinated so that a chlorine residual of not less than 25 mg/l remains in the water after standing 24 hours in the pipe. The initial chlorine content of the water shall be not less than 50 mg/l. 7-09.3(24)C
Form of Applied Chlorine
Chlorine shall be applied by one of the methods which follow, to give a dosage of not less than 50 mg/l of available chlorine.
Page 7-34
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Water Mains 7-09.3(24)D 7-09
Dry Calcium Hypochlorite
As each length of pipe is laid, sufficient high-test calcium hypochlorite (65 to 70 percent chlorine) shall be placed inside the pipe to yield a dosage of not less than 50 mg/l available chlorine, calculated on the volume of the water that the pipe and appurtenances will contain.
The number of grams of 70 percent test calcium hypochlorite required for a 20-foot length of pipe equals 0.238 × d2, in which “d” is the diameter in inches. 7-09.3(24)E

Liquid Chlorine
A chlorine gas-water mixture shall be applied by means of a solution-feed chlorinating device, or the dry gas may be fed directly through proper devices for regulating the rate of flow and providing effective diffusion of the gas into the water within the pipe being treated. Chlorinating devices for feeding solutions of the chlorine gas, or the gas itself, must provide means for preventing the backflow of water into the chlorine. 7-09.3(24)F
Chlorine-Bearing Compounds in Water
A mixture of water and high-test calcium hypochlorite (65 to 70 percent Cl) may be substituted for the chlorine gas-water mixture. The dry powder shall first be mixed as a paste and then thinned to a 1 percent chlorine solution by adding water to give a total quantity of 7.5 gallons of water per pound of dry powder. This solution shall be injected in one end of the section of main to be disinfected while filling the main with water. 7-09.3(24)G
Sodium Hypochlorite
Sodium hypochlorite, commercial grade (12.5 percent Cl) or in the form of liquid household bleach (5 to 6 percent Cl), may be substituted for the chlorine gas-water mixture. This liquid chlorine compound may be used full strength or diluted with water and injected into the main in correct proportion to the fill water so that dosage applied to the water will be at least 50 mg/l. 7-09.3(24)H
Point of Application
The point of application of the chlorinating agent shall be at the beginning of the pipeline extension or any valved section of it, and through a corporation stop inserted in the horizontal axis of the pipe. The water injector for delivering the chlorine-bearing water into the pipe should be supplied from a tap on the pressure side of the gate valve controlling the flow into the pipeline extension. Alternate points of applications may be used when approved by the Engineer. 7-09.3(24)I
Rate of Application
Water from the existing distribution system, or other source of supply, shall be controlled to flow very slowly into the newly-laid pipeline during application of the chlorine. The rate of chlorine gas-water mixture or dry gas feed shall be in such proportion to the rate of water entering the newly-laid pipe that the dosage applied to the water will be at least
50 mg/l. 7-09.3(24)J

Preventing Reverse Flow
No connections shall be made between the existing distribution system and pipelines not disinfected that are constructed under this Contract without a State Department of
Health approved backflow preventer installed in the connecting line. 7-09.3(24)K
Retention Period
Treated water shall be retained in the pipe at least 24 hours. After this period, the chlorine residual at pipe extremities and at other representative points shall be at least 25 mg/l.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-35 7-09
Water Mains 7-09.3(24)L
Chlorinating Valves, Hydrants, and Appurtenances

In the process of chlorinating newly laid pipe, valves, hydrants, and other appurtenances shall be operated while the pipeline is filled with the chlorinating agent and under normal operating pressure. 7-09.3(24)M
Chlorinating Connections to Existing Water Mains and Water Service
Connections
The chlorinating procedure to be followed shall be as specified in AWWA Standard C651.
All closure fittings shall be swabbed with a very strong chlorine solution at least as strong as liquid household bleach (5 to 6 percent Cl). 7-09.3(24)N
Final Flushing and Testing
Following chlorination, treated water shall be flushed from the newly-laid pipe until the replacement water throughout its length shows, upon test, the absence of chlorine. In the event chlorine is normally used in the source of supply, then the tests shall show a residual not in excess of that carried in the water supply system.
A sample tap shall be located ahead of the flushing hose for convenience and for sanitary sampling.
Before placing the lines into service, a satisfactory report shall be received from the local or State Health Department on samples collected from representative points in the new system. Samples will be collected and bacteriological tests obtained by the Engineer.
At a minimum, chlorinated water shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 parts per million (ppm) or less, and pH adjustment to within 6.5 to 8.5 standard units, if necessary, before discharging to surface waters of the State or to a storm sewer system that drains to surface waters of the State. 7-09.3(24)O

Repetition of Flushing and Testing
Should the initial treatment result in an unsatisfactory bacteriological test, the original chlorination procedure shall be repeated by the Contractor until satisfactory results are obtained. Failure to get a satisfactory test shall be considered as failure of the Contractor to keep the pipe clean during construction, or to properly chlorinate the main. 7-09.4
Measurement
Measurement for payment of pipe for water mains will be by the linear foot of pipe laid and tested and shall be measured along the pipe through fittings, valves, and couplings.
Measurement for payment of blowoff assembly will be per each.
When listed as a pay item, rock excavation will be measured in its original position by volume in cubic yards. The quantity measured for payment will include only the material excavated from within the limits hereinafter defined. Any additional excavation outside of these limits will be considered as having been made for the Contractor’s benefit, and all costs in connection with such excavation shall be included in the unit Contract prices for the various items of Work.
The horizontal limits for measuring rock excavation will be the sides of the trench, except no payment will be made for material removed outside of vertical planes extended beyond the maximum trench widths, as specified in Section 7-09.3(7). Vertical distances shall be measured from the upper surface of the rock to an elevation 6 inches below the underside of the pipe barrel, or to the lower surface of the rock, whichever is less. Boulders exceeding 1 cubic yard in volume shall be paid for according to their measured volume.
Removal of the extra trench excavation as defined in Section 7-09.3(7)C will be measured by the cubic yard. The depth shall be the actual depth removed for the changed line or grade in accordance with Section 7-09.3(5) or as ordered by the Engineer in accordance with Section 1-04.4. The width shall be the actual width removed for the changed line or
Page 7-36
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Water Mains 7-09 grade, but in no case shall the measured width exceed the allowable widths specified in
Section 7-09.3(7).
Removal and replacement of unsuitable material will be measured by the cubic yard. The depth shall be the actual depth removed below the depth specified in Section 7-09.3(5).
The width shall be the actual width removed, but in no case shall the measured width exceed the allowable widths specified in Section 7-09.3(7).
Measurement of bank run gravel for trench backfill will be by the cubic yard measured in trucks at the point of delivery.
Shoring or extra trench excavation will be measured as specified in Section 2-09.4 for shoring or extra excavation Class B. 7-09.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “_________Pipe for Water Main_____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for each size and kind of “__________ Pipe for
Water Main _____ In. Diam.” shall be full pay for all Work to complete the installation of the water main, including but not limited to, trench excavation, bedding, laying and jointing pipe and fittings, backfilling, concrete thrust blocking, testing, disinfecting the pipeline, flushing, dechlorination of water used for flushing, and cleanup.
Payment for restoration will be made under the applicable items shown in the
Proposal. If no pay items for restoration are included in the Proposal, restoration shall be considered incidental to the Work of constructing the water main, and all costs thereof shall be included in the unit Contract price Bid for “______ Pipe for Water Main ____ In. Diam.” “Rock Excavation”, per cubic yard.
If no pay item is listed, rock excavation shall be considered incidental to the Work to construct the water main and all costs shall be included in other items of Work specified in Section 7-09.5. “Extra Trench Excavation”, per cubic yard. “Removal and Replacement of Unsuitable Material”, per cubic yard. “Bank Run Gravel for Trench Backfill”, per cubic yard.
No separate payment will be made for clearing and grubbing, removal of existing street improvements, furnishing and installing sand cushion, protection of existing utilities and services, trench excavation and backfill, bedding the pipe, and compacting the backfill. These items shall all be considered as incidental to the Work of constructing the water main, and all costs thereof shall be included in the payment as specified in
Section 7-09.5. “Shoring or Extra Excavation Trench”, per square foot. “Blowoff Assembly”, per each.
The unit Contract price Bid per each for “Blowoff Assembly” shall be full pay for all Work to install the blowoff assembly, including but not limited to excavating, backfilling, laying and jointing pipe, tapping the main, corporation stop, pipe and fittings, gate valve, meter box, and cover and cleanup.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-37 7-10 7-10
Page 7-38
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications Vacant 7-11 7-11
2024 Standard Specifications
Page 7-39 7-12
Valves for Water Mains 7-12 7-12.1
Valves for Water Mains
Description

Valves for water mains shall be suitable for ordinary waterworks service, intended to be installed in a normal position on buried pipelines for water distribution systems.
Valves shall open counterclockwise and shall be equipped with a 2-inch-square AWWA standard operating nut. Unless otherwise specified, all valves shall be the nonrising stem type. 7-12.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Gate Valves (3 to 16 inches)
Butterfly Valves
Valve Boxes
Valve Marker Posts
Combination Air Release/Air Vacuum Valves
End Connections
Tapping Sleeve and Valve Assembly

9-30.3(1) 9-30.3(3) 9-30.3(4) 9-30.3(5) 9-30.3(7) 9-30.5(1) 9-30.3(8)
The valves shall be standard pattern of a manufacturer whose products are approved by the Engineer and shall have the name or mark of the manufacturer, year valve casting was made, size and working pressure plainly cast in raised letters on the valve body.
The valve bodies shall be cast iron, ductile iron, or other approved material mounted with approved noncorrosive metals. All wearing surfaces shall be bronze or other approved noncorrosive material, and there shall be no moving bearing or contact surfaces of iron in contact with iron. Contact surfaces shall be machined smooth and finished. All wearing surfaces shall be easily renewable. 7-12.3
Construction Requirements
All valves shall be inspected upon delivery in the field to ensure proper working order before installation. They shall be set and jointed to the pipe in the manner as set forth in the AWWA Standards for the type of connecting ends furnished. The valves shall also be carefully inspected for injury to the outer protective coatings. At all places where the coating has been ruptured or scraped off, the damaged area shall be cleaned to expose the iron base installation, and the cleaned area shall then be recoated with two or more field coats of approved protective coating.
Upon delivery at the work site, all valves shall be opened to prevent the collection of water in the valve. Valves shall have the interiors cleaned of all foreign matter and shall be inspected both in open and closed position prior to installation. Valves and valve boxes shall be set plumb and valve boxes shall be placed over the valve or valve operator in a manner that the valve box does not transmit shock or stress to the valve. The lower casting of the unit is installed first, in a manner as to be supported by a minimum backfill or by a Styrofoam collar not less than 2 inches in thickness. The casting shall not rest directly upon the body of the valve or upon the water main. Backfill shall be carefully tamped around the valve box to a distance of 3 feet on all sides or to the undisturbed face of the trench if it is closer. The cast iron valve box cover shall be set flush with the
Roadbed or finished paved surface.
The combination air release/air vacuum valves shall be installed as shown in the Plans. All piping shall be sloped to permit escape of any entrapped air. Backfilling and compaction shall be as specified in Section 7-09.
Page 7-40
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Valves for Water Mains 7-12
After installation, all valves shall be subjected to field testing and disinfected as outlined in Section 7-09. Should any defects in materials or Work become evident during testing, the Contractor shall correct such defects with the least possible delay. The testing shall be repeated at the Contractor’s expense until a satisfactory test is achieved. 7-12.3(1)
Installation of Valve Marker Post
Where required, a valve marker post shall be furnished and installed with each valve.
Valve marker posts shall be placed at the edge of the Right of Way opposite the valve and be set with 18 inches of the post exposed above grade. The exposed portion of the valve marker posts shall be painted with two coats of concrete paint in a color selected by the Engineer, and then the size of the valve and the distance in feet and inches to the valve shall be stenciled with black paint on the face of the post, using a stencil which will produce letters 2 inches high. 7-12.4
Measurement
Measurement of valves shall be per each for each type and size actually installed. 7-12.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Gate Valve ____ In.”, per each. “Butterfly Valve ____ In.”, per each. “Comb. Air Release/Air Vacuum Valve Assembly ____ In.”, per each. “Tapping Sleeve and Valve Assembly ____ In.”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for the valve specified shall be full pay for all Work to furnish and install the valve complete in place on the water main, including trenching, jointing, blocking of valve, painting, disinfecting, hydrostatic testing, valve box, and marker post.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-41 7-13 7-13
Page 7-42
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications Hydrants 7-14 7-14
Hydrants 7-14.1
Description
This section covers the installation of dry barrel fire hydrants intended for ordinary water works service. 7-14.2
Materials

Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Hydrants
End Connections
Hydrant Dimensions
Hydrant Extensions
Hydrant Restraint
Traffic Flange
Guard Posts 7-14.3 7-14.3(1) 9-30.5 9-30.5(1) 9-30.5(2) 9-30.5(3) 9-30.5(4) 9-30.5(5) 9-30.5(6)
Construction Requirements
Setting Hydrants

Where shown in the Plans, hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the Standard
Plans. In addition, a minimum 3-foot radius unobstructed working area shall be provided around all hydrants. The sidewalk flange shall be set 2 inches above finished grade.
All hydrants shall be set on concrete blocks as shown in the Standard Plans. The hydrant barrel drain shall waste into a pit of porous gravel material situated at the base of the hydrant as shown in the Standard Plans.
All hydrants shall be inspected upon delivery in the field to ensure proper working order.
After installation, fire hydrants, auxiliary gate valves, and other appurtenances thereto shall be subjected to a hydrostatic test and disinfection procedures as specified in
Section 7-09.
After all installation and testing is complete, the exposed portion of the hydrant shall be painted with one field coat. The type and color of paint will be designated by the Engineer.
Any hydrant not in service shall be identified by covering with a burlap or plastic bag properly secured. 7-14.3(2)
Hydrant Connections
Hydrant laterals shall consist of one continuous section of 6-inch ductile iron pipe from the main to the hydrant and shall include an auxiliary gate valve set vertically and placed in accordance with the Standard Plans. 7-14.3(2)A

Hydrant Restraints
The thrust created in the hydrant lateral shall be restrained as shown in the Standard
Plans. If applicable, shackle rods, after installation, shall be cleaned and painted with two coats of asphalt varnish, or with such other bituminous coating as may be approved by the Engineer. 7-14.3(2)B
Auxiliary Gate Valves and Valve Boxes
Auxiliary gate valves and valve boxes shall be installed in accordance with Section 7-12 except that the end connections shall be provided with lugs for shackling, or the bells shall provide sufficient clearance between the body of the valve and the hub to permit the installation of shackles.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-43 7-14 7-14.3(2)C
Hydrants
Hydrant Guard Posts

Hydrant guard posts shall be constructed at the locations shown in the Plans. The exposed portion of each guard post shall be painted with one coating of the type and color designated by the Engineer. 7-14.3(3)
Resetting Existing Hydrants
Where existing hydrants are shown in the Plans for adjustments to conform to a new street alignment or grade or both, the hydrant shall be relocated without disturbing the location of the hydrant lateral tee at the main.
The method for thrust restraint for the hydrant lateral shall be determined by the conditions found in the field and shall be constructed as ordered by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency.
This Work shall conform to Section 7-14.3(1). 7-14.3(4)
Moving Existing Hydrants
Existing hydrants shall be moved where shown in the Plans. When the existing hydrant lateral tee does not accommodate a new hydrant location, a new hydrant lateral tee shall be installed in the main. The existing hydrant lateral tee shall be removed from the main (if said main is to remain active), and a new section of pipe inserted into the water main in place of the existing hydrant lateral tee. Where the existing main to which the existing hydrant lateral tee is connected, and is to be abandoned or temporarily activated after the existing hydrant is moved, the open end of the hydrant lateral pipeline shall be plugged (and temporary thrust restrain provided if temporarily reactivated). All Work shall meet the requirements of Section 7-14.3(1). 7-14.3(5)
Reconnecting Existing Hydrants
Existing hydrants shall be reconnected where shown in the Plans. The location and elevation of the existing hydrant shall remain unchanged, but the existing hydrant connection is changed to connect with a new hydrant tee provided in a new main.
Where existing hydrants were not shackled to the old main, the new connection shall be shackled with steel rods as shown in the Standard Plans, or by such other shackling method as approved by the Engineer.
Hydrant reconnections shall meet the requirements of Sections 7-14.3(1) and 7-14.3(2). 7-14.3(6)

Hydrant Extensions
The Contractor shall furnish and install hydrant extensions where required. The hydrant extensions, operating stems for the hydrant main valves, and sidewalk flanges shall conform to AWWA C502. After installation, the extended fire hydrant shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test and disinfection procedure as specified in Section 7-09. 7-14.4
Measurement
Measurement of hydrant assembly, resetting existing hydrants, moving existing hydrants, and reconnecting existing hydrants will be made per each. Measurement of hydrant extension will be made per linear foot.
Page 7-44
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Hydrants 7-14.5 7-14
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Hydrant Assembly”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Hydrant Assembly” shall be full pay for all
Work to furnish and install fire hydrant assemblies, including all costs for auxiliary gate valve, shackles, tie rods, concrete blocks, gravel, and painting required for the complete installation of the hydrant assembly as specified, except the pipe connecting the hydrant to the main and the hydrant lateral tee will be paid for as specified in
Section 7-09.5. “Resetting Existing Hydrant”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Resetting Existing Hydrant” shall be full pay for all Work to reset the existing hydrant, including shackling, painting, and reconnecting to the main. New pipe required from the main to the hydrant will be paid as specified in Section 7-09.5. “Moving Existing Hydrant”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Moving Existing Hydrant” shall be full pay for all Work to move the existing hydrant, including new hydrant lateral tee, shackling, painting, and reconnecting to the main. New pipe for hydrant connections will be paid for as specified in Section 7-09.5. “Reconnecting Existing Hydrant”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Reconnecting Existing Hydrant” shall be full pay for all Work to reconnect the existing hydrant, excepting however, that new pipe used for the connection will be paid as specified in Section 7-09.5. “Hydrant Extension”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Hydrant Extension” shall be full pay for all
Work to extend the hydrant vertically.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-45 7-15
Service Connections 7-15 7-15.1
Service Connections
Description
This Work consists of installing 2 inch and smaller service connections from the main to and including the meter setter for the premises served. Service connections larger than 2 inches shall be installed as detailed on the Plans or as described in the Special
Provisions. 7-15.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Saddles
Corporation Stops
Service Pipe
Service Fittings
Meter Setters
Bronze Nipples and Fittings
Meter Boxes 7-15.3

9-30.6(1) 9-30.6(2) 9-30.6(3) 9-30.6(4) 9-30.6(5) 9-30.6(6) 9-30.6(7)
Construction Requirements
All service connections to water mains, except to ductile iron pipe Class 52 or stronger, shall be made using saddles as specified and be of the size and type suitable for use with the pipe being installed. Ductile iron pipe Class 52 or stronger may be direct tapped for corporation stops in accordance with the recommendations of DIPRA; unless direct taps are prohibited by the Special Provisions. Service pipelines shall be installed perpendicular to the main, unless shown otherwise in the Plans.
The depth of trenching for service connection piping shall provide a minimum of 3 feet of cover over the top of the pipe. Particular care shall be exercised to ensure that the main is not damaged by the Work undertaken to install the service. Excavating and backfilling for service connections shall be as specified in Section 7-09, except that the service pipeline shall be installed under pavement, curbs, and sidewalks by boring methods approved by the governmental agency having jurisdiction over the Roadway.
Service pipes shall be cut using a tool or tools specifically designed to leave a smooth, even, and square end on the piping material to be cut. Cut ends shall be reamed to the full inside diameter of the pipe. Pipe ends to be connected using couplings which seal to the outside surface of the pipe shall be cleaned to a sound, smooth finish before the couplings are installed. The meter box shall be adjusted to the finished grade after the surface has been acceptably restored.
Where shown in the Plans, existing service connections shall be reconnected to the new mains. The location of existing service connections shall be verified in the field by the
Contractor. The Contractor shall notify affected customers of the service interruption at least 24 hours prior to service interruption.
Pipe materials used to extend or replace existing service connections beyond the meter box shall be copper or polyethylene pipe. Insulating couplings shall be used at any connection between galvanized steel or iron pipe and copper pipe. All fittings, appurtenances, and other miscellaneous materials on the sections of existing pipe that have been removed shall become the property of the Contractor. 7-15.3(1)
Flushing and Disinfection
All service pipe and appurtenances shall be prechlorinated prior to installation. After installation, the service connection shall be flushed prior to connecting the meter.

Page 7-46
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Service Connections 7-15.4 7-15
Measurement
Service connections will be measured per each for each size of service connection installed. 7-15.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when it is included in the Proposal: “Service Connection ____ In. Diam.”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Service Connection ____ In. Diam.” shall be full pay for all Work to install the service connection, including but not limited to, excavating, tapping the main, laying and jointing the pipe and fittings and appurtenances, backfilling, testing, flushing, and disinfection of the service connection.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 7-47 7-16 7-16
Page 7-48
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications Sanitary Sewers 7-17
Sanitary Sewers 7-17.1
Description 7-17
This Work consists of constructing sanitary sewer lines in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and the Standard Plans, as staked. 7-17.2
Materials
Pipe used for sanitary sewers may be:
Rigid
Concrete
Vitrified Clay
Ductile Iron

Thermoplastic
ABS Composite
PVC (Polyvinyl Chloride)
Polypropylene
All sanitary sewer pipe shall have flexible gasketed joints unless otherwise specified.
It is not intended that materials listed are to be considered equal or generally interchangeable for all applications. The Engineer shall determine from the materials listed those suitable for the project, and shall so specify in the Specifications or the Plans.
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections.
Plain Concrete Storm Sewer Pipe
Reinforced Concrete Storm Sewer Pipe
Vitrified Clay Sewer Pipe
Solid Wall PVC Sanitary Sewer Pipe
Profile Wall PVC Sanitary Sewer Pipe
Ductile Iron Sewer Pipe
ABS Composite Sewer Pipe
Polypropylene Sewer Pipe

9-05.7(1) 9-05.7(2) 9-05.8 9-05.12(1) 9-05.12(2) 9-05.13 9-05.14 9-05.24
All pipe shall be clearly marked with type, class, and thickness. Lettering shall be legible and permanent under normal conditions of handling and storage. 7-17.3
Construction Requirements
Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with Section 7-08.3. 7-17.3(1)
Protection of Existing Sewerage Facilities
All existing live sewers including septic tanks and drain fields shall be kept in service at all times. Provision shall be made for disposal of sewage flow if any existing sewers are damaged. Damage to existing sewers shall be repaired by the Contractor, at no expense to the Contracting Agency, to a condition equal to or better than their condition prior to the damage.
Water accumulating during construction shall be removed from the new sewers but shall not be permitted to enter the existing system. The Contractor shall be responsible for flushing out and cleaning any existing sewers into which gravel, rocks, or other debris has entered as a result of their operations, and shall repair lift stations or other facilities damaged by the Contractor’s operations.
The physical connection to an existing manhole or sewer shall not be made until authorized by the Engineer. Such authorization will not be given until all upstream lines have been completely cleaned, all debris removed, and where applicable, a pipe temporarily placed in the existing channel and sealed.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 7-49 7-17
Sanitary Sewers 7-17.3(2)
Cleaning and Testing 7-17.3(2)A
General
Sewers and appurtenances, where required in the Plans, shall be cleaned and tested after backfilling by either the exfiltration or low pressure air method at the option of the
Contractor, except where the ground water table is such that the Engineer may require the infiltration test.
All Work involved in cleaning and testing sewer lines between manholes or rodding inlets as required shall be completed within 15 working days after backfilling of sewer lines and Structures. Any further delay will require the written consent of the Engineer. The
Contractor shall furnish all labor, materials, tools, and equipment necessary to make the test, clean the lines, and perform all incidental Work. The Contractor shall perform the tests under the direction and in the presence of the Engineer. Precautions shall be taken to prevent joints from drawing during tests, and any damage resulting from these tests shall be repaired by the Contractor at no expense to the Contracting Agency. The manner and time of testing shall be subject to approval by the Engineer.
All yes, tees, and stubs shall be plugged with flexible jointed caps, or acceptable alternate, securely fastened to withstand the internal test pressure. Such plugs or caps shall be readily removable, and their removal shall provide a socket suitable for making a flexible jointed lateral connection or extension.
Testing side sanitary sewers shall be for their entire length from the public sewer in the street to the connection with the building’s plumbing. Their testing shall be as required by the local sanitary agency but in no case shall it be less thorough than that of filling the pipe with water before backfilling and visually inspecting the exterior for leakage. The decision of the Engineer as to acceptance of the side sanitary sewer shall be final.
If any sewer installation fails to meet the requirements of the test method used, the
Contractor shall determine, at no expense to the Contracting Agency, the source or sources of leakage and shall repair or replace all defective materials or Work at no expense to the Contracting Agency. The complete pipe installation shall meet the requirements of the test method used before being considered acceptable. 7-17.3(2)B

Exfiltration Test
Prior to making exfiltration leakage tests, the Contractor may fill the pipe with clear water to permit normal absorption into the pipe walls provided, however, that after so filling the pipe, the Contractor shall complete the leakage test within 24 hours after filling. When under test, the allowable leakage shall be limited according to the provisions that follow.
Specified allowances assume pre-wetted pipe.
Leakage shall be no more than 0.28 gph per inch diameter per 100 feet of sewer, with a hydrostatic head of 6 feet above the crown at the upper end of the test section, or above the natural ground water table at the time of test, whichever is higher. The length of pipe tested shall be limited so that the pressure at the lower end of the Section tested does not exceed 16 feet of head above the invert, and in no case shall be greater than 700 feet or the distance between manholes when greater than 700 feet.
Where the test head is other than 6 feet, the maximum leakage shall not exceed the amount determined from the following equation:
Maximum leakage (in gallons per hour) = 0.28 × (√H/√6) × D × (L/100)
Where:
D = diameter (in.)
L = length of pipe (ft.)
H = test head (ft.)
When the test is to be made one joint at a time, the leakage per joint shall not exceed the computed allowable leakage per length of pipe.
Page 7-50

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Sanitary Sewers 7-17.3(2)C 7-17
Infiltration Test
Where the natural ground water head over the pipe is 2 feet or less above the crown of pipe at the upper end of the test section, the infiltration test leakage shall not exceed
0.16 gallons per hour per inch of diameter per 100 feet of pipe length. The length of pipe tested shall not exceed 700 feet or the distance between manholes when greater than
700 feet.
Where the natural ground water head is greater than 2 feet, the maximum leakage shall not exceed the amount determined from the following equation:
Maximum leakage (in` gallons per hour) = 0.16 × (√H/√2) × D × (L/100)
Where:
D = diameter (in.)
L = length of pipe (ft.)
H = natural ground water head (ft.)
When a suitable head of ground water exists above the crown of the pipe and when the pipe is large enough to work inside, acceptance may be based on the repair of visible leakage by means satisfactory to the Engineer. 7-17.3(2)D

Other Test Allowances
For either the infiltration or exfiltration test, all lateral or side sewer branches included in the test section shall be taken into account in computing allowable leakage. An allowance of 0.2 gallons per hour per foot of head above invert shall be made for each manhole included in a test section.
Upon final acceptance of the Work all sewers, side sewers and fittings shall be open, clean, and free draining. 7-17.3(2)E
Low Pressure Air Test for Sanitary Sewers Constructed of Air Permeable
Materials
Air permeable materials include concrete and vitrified clay. Low pressure air testing may be used for air permeable pipes 30 inches in diameter and smaller.
The test equipment to be used shall be furnished by the Contractor and shall be inspected and approved by the Engineer prior to use. The Engineer may at any time require a calibration test of gauges or other instrumentation that is incorporated into the test equipment. Calibration tests shall be certified by an independent testing Laboratory.
Plugs used to close the pipe for the air test must be securely braced to prevent the unintentional release of a plug, which can become a high velocity projectile. Gauges, air piping manifold, and valves shall be located at the top of the ground. No one shall be permitted to enter a manhole or catch basin where a plugged pipe is under pressure. Air testing apparatus shall be equipped with a pressure release device, such as a rupture disk or a pressure relief valve, designed to activate when the pressure in the pipe exceeds
2 psig above the required test pressure.
If the pipe to be tested is submerged by groundwater, the backpressure on the pipe created by the groundwater submergence must be determined. All gauge pressures described in the test shall be increased by that amount.
The first section of pipe installed by each crew shall be tested in order to qualify the crew and material. A successful test for the section shall be a prerequisite to further installation by that crew. Following the initial test, pipes shall be tested from manhole to manhole, catch basin to catch basin, or such shorter lengths as determined by the Contractor.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-51 7-17
Sanitary Sewers
Air shall be slowly supplied to the plugged pipe section until the internal air pressure reaches 4 psig. Wait at least 2 minutes to allow for pressure and temperature stabilization to occur within the pipe.
When the pressure decreases to 3.5 psig, the air pressure test shall begin. The test shall consist of measuring the time in seconds for the pressure in the pipe to drop from 3.5 psig to 2.5 psig. The pipe shall be considered acceptable if the time in seconds for the pressure drop is equal to or greater than the required time as calculated below:
K = 0.0111d2L
C = 0.0003918dL
If CT <1, then time = KT
If 1 <CT <1.75, then time = KT/CT
If CT > 1.75, then time = KT/1.75
Where: d
L
K
C
KT
CT

=
Pipe diameter (inches)
Pipe length (feet) value for each length of pipe of a specific diameter value for each length of pipe of a specific diameter sum of all K values sum of all C values
This method was developed based on an allowable air loss rate of 0.003 cubic feet per minute (cfm) per square foot of internal pipe surface, with the total air loss rate not less than 2 cfm nor greater than 3.5 cfm. At the Contractor’s option, the pipe may be tested without pre‑wetting; however, the allowable air loss rate assumes pre-wetted pipe.
Pipe over 30 inches in diameter shall be tested one joint at a time in accordance with
ASTM C1103. 7-17.3(2)F
Low Pressure Air Test for Sanitary Sewers Constructed of Non Air
Permeable Materials
Non air permeable materials include ductile iron, ABS composite, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and polyethylene (PE). When non air permeable pipe is subjected to a low-pressure air test, all of the provisions of Section 7-17.3(2)E shall apply, except that the time in seconds for the pressure drop shall be equal to or greater than four times the required time calculated in Section 7-17.3(2)E.
ASTM C1103.
Reaches of thermoplastic pipe containing no joints shall be exempt from testing requirements. 7-17.3(2)G

Deflection Test for Thermoplastic Pipe
Sanitary sewers constructed of thermoplastic pipe shall be tested for deflection not less than 30 days after the trench backfill and compaction has been completed. The test shall be conducted by pulling a properly sized “go-nogo” mandrel through the completed pipeline. Testing shall be conducted on a manhole-to-manhole basis and shall be done after the line has been completely flushed out with water.
The mandrel shall be a rigid, nonadjustable mandrel having an effective length of not less than its normal diameter and an odd-number of legs (9 legs minimum). Minimum diameter at any point along the full length of the mandrel shall be 95 percent of the base inside diameter of the pipe being tested.
Page 7-52
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Sanitary Sewers 7-17
Base inside diameter is derived by subtracting a statistical tolerance package from the average inside diameter. The tolerance package is defined as the square root of the sum of squared manufacturing tolerances. The tolerance package for controlled outside diameter pipe consists of (1) outside diameter tolerance specified in applicable ASTM Standard, (2) 12 percent of one wall thickness specified in applicable ASTM Standard, and (3) out of roundness tolerance listed in appendix of applicable ASTM Standard. The items in the tolerance package for controlled inside diameter pipe consists of (1) inside diameter tolerance listed in appendix of applicable ASTM Standard and (2) out of roundness tolerance listed in appendix of applicable ASTM Standard. When out of roundness tolerance is not listed, use 3 percent of average inside diameter.
The average inside diameter for pipe with controlled outside diameter shall be equal to the average outside diameter as specified in applicable ASTM Standard minus 2 minimum wall thicknesses as specified in applicable ASTM Standard and minus 2 times excess wall tolerance of 6 percent. The average inside diameter for pipes with controlled inside diameter shall be the average inside diameter as specified in applicable ASTM Standard.
The Contractor shall be required, at no expense to the Contracting Agency, to locate and uncover any sections failing to pass the test and, if not damaged, reinstall the pipe. The use of a vibratory re-rounding device or any process other than removal or reinstallation shall not be acceptable. The Contractor shall retest the section after replacement of the pipe.
Pipe large enough to work inside of may be accepted on the basis of direct measurement. 7-17.3(2)H

Television Inspection
The Engineer may require any or all sanitary sewer lines be inspected by the use of a television camera before final acceptance. The costs incurred in making the initial inspection shall be borne by the owner of the sanitary sewer.
The Contractor shall bear all costs incurred in correcting any deficiencies found during television inspection including the cost of any additional television inspection that may be required by the Engineer to verify the correction of said deficiency.
The Contractor shall be responsible for all costs incurred in any television inspection performed solely for the benefit of the Contractor. 7-17.4
Measurement
The length of sewer pipe will be the number of linear feet of completed installation measured along the invert and will include the length through elbows, tees and fittings.
The number of linear feet will be measured from the center of manhole to center of manhole or to the inside face of catch basins and similar type Structures.
The length of testing sewer pipe in conformance with Section 7-17.3(2) will be the number of linear feet of completed installation actually tested. 7-17.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Plain Conc. or V.C. Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Cl. ____ Reinf. Conc. Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “PVC Sanitary Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Ductile Iron Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “ABS Composite Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Polypropylene Sewer Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-53 7-17
Sanitary Sewers
The unit Contract price per linear foot for sewer pipe of the kind and size specified shall be full pay for furnishing, hauling, and assembling in place the completed installation including all wyes, tees, special fittings, joint materials, bedding and backfill material, and adjustment of inverts to manholes for the completion of the installation to the required lines and grades. “Testing Sewer Pipe”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Testing Sewer Pipe” shall be full pay for all labor, material and equipment required to conduct the leakage tests required in
Section 7-17.3(2). “Removal and Replacement of Unsuitable Material”, per cubic yard.
The unit Contract price per cubic yard for “Removal and Replacement of Unsuitable
Material” shall be full pay for all Work to remove unsuitable material and replace and compact suitable material as specified in Section 7-08.3(1)A.
Page 7-54

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Side Sewers 7-18 7-18
Side Sewers 7-18.1
Description
This Work shall consist of constructing side sewers in accordance with the Plans, these
Specifications, and the Standard Plans, at locations staked, on both the right of way and private property between the main sanitary sewer line and the stubout from a residence or other building. 7-18.2
Materials
Materials shall be the same as required for sanitary sewers in Section 7-17. 7-18.3 7-18.3(1)
Construction Requirements
General

The construction requirements for sanitary sewers in Section 7-17 shall apply to the construction of side sewers.
Side sewers shall not be backfilled prior to inspection.
Side sewers shall be constructed with a maximum joint deflection not to exceed the manufacturer’s printed recommendations and in no case shall exceed 2 inches per foot in any joint. Larger changes in direction shall be made by use of standard ⅛ bends. 7-18.3(2)
Fittings
Side sewers shall be connected to the tee, wye, or riser provided in the public sewer, where such is available, utilizing approved fittings or adapters. Where no tee, wye, or riser is provided or available, connection shall be made by machine made tap and approved saddle. 7-18.3(3)
Testing
All side sewers shall be tested after backfilling.
All side sewers constructed in conjunction with the main sewer shall, for purposes of testing as specified in Section 7-17, have a 6-inch tee fitting pipe placed at the point where the side sewer crosses the street or other public Right of Way margin. The tee opening shall be positioned perpendicular to the side sewer slope, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
When side sewers are not tested simultaneously with the testing of the main sewer, the
Contractor, at no expense to the Contracting Agency, shall furnish and place an additional tee in the first pipe out of the main sewer tee or wye branch, so that an inflatable rubber ball can be inserted for sealing off the side sewer and thus permit separate tests. 7-18.3(4)

Extending Side Sewers Into Private Property
Side sewers shall not be constructed on private property prior to completion and acceptance of the main line and side sewer on public Right of Way or easement unless approved in writing by the Engineer. 7-18.3(5)
End Pipe Marker
The location of side sewers at the property line shall be marked by the Contractor with a
2 by 4-inch wooden stake 4 feet long buried in the ground a depth of 3 feet. The low end shall have a 2 by 4-inch cleat nailed to it to prevent withdrawal of the stake. The exposed end shall be painted traffic white and the depth to the side sewer or tee shall be indicated in black paint on the 2 by 4. In addition, a length of 12-gage galvanized wire shall be provided to extend from the plugged end of the side sewer or tee. The upper end shall emerge at the 4-foot stake, but shall not be fastened to it.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-55 7-18 7-18.4
Side Sewers
Measurement

Measurement shall be as specified in Section 7-17.4. 7-18.5
Payment
Payment shall be made for each of the Bid items shown in Section 7-17.5 that are included in the Proposal.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for sewer pipe of the various kind and size specified shall be full pay for all Work required for the completion of the installation including fittings and end pipe marker.
Page 7-56
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Sewer Cleanouts 7-19
Sewer Cleanouts 7-19.1
Description 7-19
This Work consists of constructing sanitary sewer cleanouts in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and the Standard Plans as staked. 7-19.2

Materials
All materials incorporated into the total cleanout Structure shall meet the requirements of the various applicable sections of these Specifications. 7-19.3
Construction Requirements
A cleanout shall be provided for each total change of 90 degrees of grade or alignment and in no case shall the spacing of cleanouts exceed 100 feet. No cleanout will be required at the connection of the side sewer to a riser on the public sewer. A suitably located cleanout in the house piping or plumbing may be considered as a cleanout for the side sewer. Cleanouts shall consist of a wye branch in the side sewer.
All cleanouts located in public rights of way shall be extended to grade.
The extension of cleanouts to grade on private property will be optional with the property owner. When extended to grade, cleanouts shall be full side sewer diameter and shall be extended to a point not less than 6 inches nor more than 12 inches below the finished ground surface and shall be plugged with a removable stopper which will prevent passage of dirt or water. When specified, the Contractor shall install an approved casting to provide ready access to the cleanout stopper. A ⅛ bend shall be used to deflect the side sewer upward as a cleanout where the terminal end of the side sewer lies upstream from the last point of connection. 7-19.4
Measurement
Sewer cleanouts will be measured per each. 7-19.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when listed in the Proposal: “Sewer Cleanout”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for cleanouts shall be full pay for furnishing and placing the wye, pipe, pipe bends, pipe plug, castings, and collar as specified herein and as shown on the Standard Plans.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 7-57 7-19
Page 7-58
Sewer Cleanouts
2024 Standard Specifications Division 8 8-01
Miscellaneous Construction
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.1
Description
This Work consists of furnishing, installing, maintaining, removing and disposing of best management practices (BMPs), as defined in the Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 173-201A, to manage erosion and water quality in accordance with these Specifications and as shown in the Plans or as designated by the Engineer.
The Contracting Agency may have a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
Construction Stormwater General Permit (CSWGP) as identified in the Contract Special
Provisions. The Contracting Agency may or may not transfer coverage of the CSWGP to the Contractor when a CSWGP has been obtained. The Contracting Agency may not have a CSWGP for the project but may have another water quality related permit as identified in the Contract Special Provisions or the Contracting Agency may not have water quality related permits but the project is subject to applicable laws for the Work. Section 8-01 covers all of these conditions. 8-01.1(1) 1.

2. 3.
Definitions pH Affected Stormwater a.
Stormwater contacting green concrete (concrete that has set/stiffen but is still curing), recycled concrete, or engineered soils (as defined in the Construction
Stormwater General Permit (CSWGP)) as a natural process b. pH monitoring shall be performed in accordance with the CSWGP, or
Water Quality Standards (WQS in accordance with WAC 173-201A (surface) or 173-200C (ground)) when the CSWGP does not apply c.
May be neutralized and discharged to surface waters or neutralized and infiltrated pH Affected Non-Stormwater a.
Conditionally authorized in accordance with CSWGP Special Condition S.1.C., uncontaminated water contacting green concrete, recycled concrete, or engineered soils (as defined in the CSWGP) b.
Shall not be categorized as cementitious wastewater/concrete wastewater, as defined below c.
Shall be managed and treated in accordance with the CSWGP, or WQS when the
CSWGP does not apply

d. pH adjustment and dechlorination may be necessary, as specified in the CSWGP or in accordance with WQS when the CSWGP does not apply e.
May be neutralized, treated, and discharged to surface waters or neutralized and infiltrated in accordance with the CSWGP, with the exception of water-only shaft drilling slurry. Water-only shaft drilling slurry may be treated, neutralized, and infiltrated but not discharged to surface waters (refer to Special Conditions S1.C.
Authorized Discharges and S1.d Prohibited Discharges of the CSWGP)
Cementitious Wastewater/Concrete Wastewater a.
All water that comes into contact with fine cementitious particles or slurry; water used in the production, placement and/or clean-up of cementitious products; water used to cut, grind, wash, or otherwise modify cementitious products
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-1 8-01
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control b.
When water, including stormwater, commingles with cementitious wastewater/ concrete wastewater, the resulting water is considered cementitious wastewater/ concrete wastewater and shall be managed to prevent discharge to waters of the
State, including ground water

c.
CSWGP Examples include: water used for or resulting from concrete truck/ mixer/pumper/tool/chute rinsing or washing, concrete saw cutting and surfacing (sawing, coring, grinding, roughening, hydro-demolition, bridge and road surfacing) d.
Cannot be neutralized and discharged or infiltrated 8-01.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Corrugated Polyethylene Drain Pipe
Quarry Spalls
Seed
Fertilizer
Mulch and Amendments
Tackifier
Erosion Control Devices
Plant Materials
Construction Geotextile

9-05.1(6) 9-13.1(5) 9-14.3 9-14.3 9-14.5 9-14.5(7) 9-14.6 9-14.7 9-33
Recycled concrete, in any form, shall not be used for Work defined in Section 8-01. 8-01.3 8-01.3(1)
Construction Requirements
General
Adaptive management shall be employed throughout the duration of the project for the implementation of erosion and water pollution control permit requirements for the current condition of the project site. The adaptive management includes the selection and utilization of BMPs, scheduling of activities, prohibiting unacceptable practices, implementing maintenance procedures, and other managerial practices that when used singularly or in combination, prevent or reduce the release of pollutants to waters of the State. The adaptive management shall use the means and methods identified in this section and means and methods identified in the Washington State Department of
Transportation’s Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual or the Washington State
Department of Ecology’s Stormwater Management Manuals for construction stormwater.
The Contractor shall install a high visibility fence along the lines shown in the Plans or as instructed by the Engineer.
Throughout the life of the project, the Contractor shall preserve and protect the delineated preservation area, acting immediately to repair or restore all damaged or removed high visibility fencing.
All discharges to surface waters shall comply with surface water quality standards as defined in Washington Administrative Code (WAC) Chapter 173-201A. All discharges to groundwater shall comply with groundwater quality standards WAC Chapter 173-200.
The Contractor shall comply with the CSWGP when the project is covered by the CSWGP.
Work, at a minimum, shall include the implementation of: 1.

Sediment control measures prior to ground disturbing activities to ensure all discharges from construction areas receive treatment prior to discharging from the site. 2.
Flow control measures to prevent erosive flows from developing.
Page 8-2
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01 3.
Water management strategies and pollution prevention measures to prevent contamination of waters that will be discharged to surface waters or the ground. 4.
Erosion control measures to stabilize erodible earth not being worked. 5.
Maintenance of BMPs to ensure continued compliant performance. 6.
Immediate corrective action if evidence suggests construction activity is not in compliance. Evidence includes sampling data, olfactory or visual evidence such as the presence of suspended sediment, turbidity, discoloration, or oil sheen in discharges.
To the degree possible, the Contractor shall coordinate this Work with permanent drainage and roadside restoration Work the Contract requires.
Clearing, grubbing, excavation, borrow, or fill within the Right of Way shall never expose more erodible earth than as listed below:
Western Washington (West of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
May 1 through September 30

17 Acres
October 1 through April 30
5 Acres
Eastern Washington (East of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
April 1 through October 31
17 Acres
November 1 through March 31
5 Acres
The Engineer may increase or decrease the limits based on project conditions.
Erodible earth is defined as a surface where soils, grindings, or other materials may be capable of being displaced and transported by rain, wind, or surface water runoff.
Erodible earth not being worked, whether at final grade or not, shall be covered within the specified time period (see the table below) BMPs for erosion control.
Western Washington (West of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
October 1 through April 30

2 days maximum
May 1 to September 30
7 days maximum
Eastern Washington (East of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
October 1 through June 30
5 days maximum
July 1 through September 30
10 days maximum
When applicable, the Contractor shall be responsible for all Work required for compliance with CSWGP including annual permit fees.
If the Engineer, under Section 1-08.6, orders the Work suspended, the Contractor shall continue to comply with this division during the suspension. 8-01.3(1)A

Submittals 8-01.3(1)A1
Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control (TESC) Plans consist of a narrative section and plan sheets that meets Ecology’s Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) requirement in the CSWGP. For projects that do not require a CSWGP but have the potential to discharge to surface waters of the state, an abbreviated TESC plan shall be used, which may consist of a narrative and/or plan sheets and shall demonstrate
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-3 8-01
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control compliance with applicable codes, ordinances and regulations, including the water quality standards for surface waters, Chapter 173-201A of the Washington Administrative
Code (WAC) and water quality standards for groundwaters in accordance with Chapter 173-200 WAC.
The Contractor shall either adopt the TESC Plan in the Contract or develop a new
TESC Plan. If the Contractor adopts the TESC Plan in scenarios in which the CSWGP is transferred to the Contractor, the Contractor shall modify the TESC Plan to match the
Contractor’s schedule, method of construction, and to include all areas that will be used to directly support construction activity such as equipment staging yards, material storage areas, or borrow areas. TESC Plans shall include all high visibility fence shown in the
Plans. All TESC Plans shall meet the requirements of the current edition of the WSDOT
Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109 and be adaptively managed throughout construction based on site inspections and required sampling to maintain compliance with the CSWGP, or WQS when no CSWGP applies. The Contractor shall develop a schedule for implementation of the TESC work and incorporate it into the
Contractor’s progress schedule.
The Contractor shall submit their TESC Plan (either the adopted plan or new plan) as
Type 2 Working Drawings. At the request of the Engineer updated TESC Plans shall be submitted as Type 1 Working Drawings. 8-01.3(1)B

Erosion and Sediment Control (ESC) Lead
The Contractor shall identify the ESC Lead at the preconstruction discussions and in the
TESC Plan. The ESC Lead shall have, for the life of the Contract, a current Certificate of
Training in Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control from a course approved by the Washington State Department of Ecology. The ESC Lead must be onsite or on call at all times throughout construction. The ESC Lead shall be listed on the Emergency Contact
List required under Section 1-05.13(1).
The ESC Lead shall implement the TESC Plan. Implementation shall include, but is not limited to: 1.
Installing, adaptively managing, and maintaining temporary erosion and sediment control BMPs to assure continued performance of their intended function. Damaged or inadequate BMPs shall be corrected immediately. 2.
Updating the TESC Plan to reflect current field conditions. 3.
Discharge sampling and submitting Discharge Monitoring Reports (DMRs) to Ecology in accordance with the CSWGP. 4.
Develop and maintain the Site Log Book as defined in the CSWGP. When the Site Log
Book or portion thereof is electronically developed, the electronic documentation must be accessible onsite. As a part of the Site Log Book, the Contractor shall develop and maintain a tracking table to show that identified TESC compliance issues are fully resolved within 10 calendar days. The table shall include the date an issue was identified, a description of how it was resolved, and the date the issue was fully resolved.

The ESC Lead shall also inspect all areas disturbed by construction activities, all on-site erosion and sediment control BMP’s, and all stormwater discharge points at least once every calendar week and within 24-hours of runoff events in which stormwater discharges from the site. Inspections of temporarily stabilized inactive sites may be reduced to once every calendar month. For projects with a CSWGP, the Washington State Department of Ecology’s Erosion and Sediment Control Site Inspection Form, located at https:// ecology.wa.gov/Regulations-Permits/Permits-certifications/Stormwater-general-permits/
Construction-stormwater-permit shall be completed for each inspection and a copy shall be submitted to the Engineer no later than the end of the next working day following the inspection.
Page 8-4
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.3(1)C 8-01
Water Management
Unless site water is to be managed in accordance with the conditions of a waste discharge permit from a local permitting authority, site water shall be managed as follows: 8-01.3(1)C1
Disposal of Dewatering Water
To manage turbid dewatering water encountered onsite, it must pass through BMPs to reduce sedimentation prior to discharging to a sediment trap or sediment pond. Turbid dewatering water disposal options may include sheet flow dispersion and infiltration within vegetation onsite, transport in a vehicle for off-site legal disposal, Ecologyapproved on-site chemical treatment, sanitary or combined sewer discharge with local sewer district approval, or use of a sedimentation bag that discharges to a ditch or swale for small volumes of localized dewatering. Highly turbid or contaminated dewatering water must be handled separately from stormwater.
Clean and non-turbid dewatering water may be discharged to systems tributary to or directly into surface waters of the state provided it does not cause erosion or flooding of receiving waters, in accordance with the CSWGP and water quality standards in
WAC 173-201A. 8-01.3(1)C2

Process Wastewater
Wastewater generated on-site as a byproduct of a construction process shall not be discharged to surface waters of the State. Some sources of process wastewater may be infiltrated in accordance with the CSWGP. Some sources of process wastewater may be disposed via independent disposal and treatment alternatives in compliance with the applicable WACs and permits. 8-01.3(1)C3
Shaft Drilling Slurry Wastewater
Wastewater generated on-site during shaft drilling activity shall be managed and disposed of in accordance with the requirements below. No shaft drilling slurry wastewater shall be discharged to surface waters of the State. Neither the sediment nor liquid portions of the shaft drilling slurry wastewater shall be contaminated, as detectable by visible or olfactory indication (e.g., chemical sheen or smell). 1.
Water-only shaft drilling slurry or water slurry with accepted flocculants may be infiltrated on-site. Flocculants used shall meet the requirements of Section 9-14.6(1) or shall be chitosan products listed as General Use Level Designation (GULD) on the Department of Ecology’s stormwater treatment technologies webpage for construction treatment. Infiltration is permitted if the following requirements are met: a.
Wastewater shall have a pH of 6.5 – 8.5 prior to discharge. b.
The amount of flocculant added to the slurry shall be kept to the minimum needed to adequately settle out solids. The flocculant shall be thoroughly mixed into the slurry. c.
The slurry removed from the shaft shall be contained in a leak proof cell or tank for a minimum of 3 hours. d.
The infiltration rate shall be reduced if needed to prevent wastewater from leaving the infiltration location. The infiltration site shall be monitored regularly during infiltration activity. All wastewater discharged to the ground shall fully infiltrate and discharges shall stop before the end of each work day. e.
Drilling spoils and settled sediments remaining in the containment cell or tank shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 6-19.3(4)F.

f.
Infiltration locations shall be in upland areas at least 150 feet away from surface waters, wells, on-site sewage systems, aquifer sensitive recharge areas, sole source aquifers, well head protection areas, and shall be marked on the plan sheets before the infiltration activity begins.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-5 8-01
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control g.
Prior to infiltration, the Contractor shall submit a Shaft Drilling Slurry Wastewater
Management and Infiltration Plan as a Type 2 Working Drawing. This Plan shall be kept on-site, adapted if needed to meet the construction requirements, and updated to reflect what is being done in the field. The Working Drawing shall include, at a minimum, the following information: i.
Plan sheet showing the proposed infiltration location and all surface waters, wells, on-site sewage systems, aquifer-sensitive recharge areas, sole source aquifers, and well-head protection areas within 150 feet. ii.
The proposed elevation of soil surface receiving the wastewater for infiltration and the anticipated phreatic surface (i.e., saturated soil).

iii. The source of the water used to produce the slurry. iv. The estimated total volume of wastewater to be infiltrated. v.
The accepted flocculant to be used (if any). vi. The controls or methods used to prevent surface wastewater runoff from leaving the infiltration location. vii. The strategy for removing slurry wastewater from the shaft and containing the slurry wastewater once it has been removed from the shaft. viii. The strategy for monitoring infiltration activity and adapting methods to ensure compliance. ix. A contingency plan that can be implemented immediately if it becomes evident that the controls in place or methods being used are not adequate. x. 2.
The strategy for cleaning up the infiltration location after the infiltration activity is done. Cleanup shall include stabilizing loose sediments on the surface within the infiltration area generated as a byproduct of suspended solids in the infiltrated wastewater or soil disturbance associated with BMP placement and removal.
Shaft drilling mineral slurry, synthetic slurry, or slurry with polymer additives not allowed for infiltration shall be contained and disposed of by the Contractor at an accepted disposal facility in accordance with Section 2-03.3(7)C. Spoils that have come into contact with mineral slurry shall be disposed of in accordance with
Section 6-19.3(4)F. 8-01.3(1)C4
Management of Off-Site Water
Prior to clearing and grubbing, the Contractor shall intercept all sources of off-site surface water and overland flow that will run-on to the project. Off-site surface water run-on shall be diverted through or around the project in a way that does not introduce construction related pollution. It shall be diverted to its preconstruction discharge location in a manner that does not increase preconstruction flow rate and velocity and protects contiguous properties and waterways from erosion. The Contractor shall submit a Type 2 Working
Drawing consisting of the method for performing this Work. 8-01.3(1)C5
Water Management for In-Water Work Below Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM)
Work over surface waters of the state (defined in WAC 173-201A-010) or below the
OHWM (defined in RCW 90.58.030) shall comply with water quality standards for surface waters of the state of Washington.

Page 8-6
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.3(1)C6 8-01
Environmentally Acceptable Hydraulic Fluid
All equipment containing hydraulic fluid that extends from a bridge deck over surface waters of the state or below the OHWM, shall be equipped with a biodegradable hydraulic fluid. The fluid shall achieve either a Pw1 Environmental Persistence
Classification stated in ASTM D6046 (≥60% biodegradation in 28 days) or equivalent standard. Alternatively, hydraulic fluid that meets International Organization for
Standardization (ISO 15380), the European Union Ecolabel, or equivalent certification will also be accepted.
The Contractor shall submit a Type 1 Working Drawing consisting of a manufacturer catalog cut of the hydraulic fluid used.
The designation of biodegradable hydraulic fluid does not mean fluid spills are acceptable.
The Contractor shall respond to spills to land or water in accordance with the Contract, the associated SPCC Plan, and all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 8-01.3(1)C7

Turbidity Curtain
All Work for the turbidity curtain shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations for the site conditions. Removal procedures shall be developed and used to minimize silt release and disturbance of silt. The Contractor shall submit a Type 2 Working Drawing, detailing product information, installation and removal procedures, equipment and workforce needs, maintenance plans, and emergency repair/ replacement plans.
Turbidity curtain materials, installation, and maintenance shall be sufficient to comply with water quality standards.
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer 10 days in advance of removing the turbidity curtain. All components of the turbidity curtain shall be removed from the project. 8-01.3(1)D
Dispersion/Infiltration
Water shall be conveyed only to dispersion or infiltration areas designated in the TESC
Plan or to sites approved by the Engineer. Water shall be conveyed to designated dispersion areas at a rate such that, when runoff leaves the area and enters waters of the
State, turbidity standards are achieved. Water shall be conveyed to designated infiltration areas at a rate that does not produce surface runoff. 8-01.3(1)E
Detention/Retention Pond Construction
Permanent or temporary, ponds shall be constructed before beginning other grading and excavation Work in the area that drains into that pond. Detention/retention ponds may be constructed concurrently with grading and excavation when allowed by the Engineer.
Temporary conveyances shall be installed concurrently with grading in accordance with the TESC Plan so that newly graded areas drain to the pond as they are exposed. 8-01.3(2)

Temporary Seeding and Mulching 8-01.3(2)A
Preparation for Application
A cleated roller, crawler tractor, or similar equipment, which forms longitudinal depressions at least 2 inches deep shall be used for compaction and preparation of the surface to be seeded. The entire area shall be uniformly covered with longitudinal depressions formed perpendicular to the natural flow of water on the slope. The soil shall be conditioned with sufficient water so the longitudinal depressions remain in the soil surface until completion of the seeding. 8-01.3(2)B
Temporary Seeding
Temporary grass seed shall be a commercially prepared mix, made up of low growing grass species that will grow without irrigation at the project location, and accepted by the
Engineer. The application rate shall be two pounds per 1000 square feet.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-7 8-01
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control

The Contractor shall notify the Engineer not less than 24 hours in advance of seeding operations and shall not begin the Work until areas prepared or designated for seeding have been accepted. Following the Engineer’s acceptance, seeding of the accepted slopes shall begin immediately.
Temporary seeding may be sown at any time allowed by the Engineer. Temporary seeding shall be sown by one of the following methods: 1.
A hydro seeder that utilizes water as the carrying agent and maintains continuous agitation through paddle blades. It shall have an operating capacity sufficient to agitate, suspend, and mix into a homogeneous slurry the specified amount of seed and water or other material. Distribution and discharge lines shall be large enough to prevent stoppage and shall be equipped with a set of hydraulic discharge spray nozzles that will provide a uniform distribution of the slurry. 2.
Blower equipment with an adjustable disseminating device capable of maintaining a constant, measured rate of material discharge that will ensure an even distribution of seed at the rates specified. 3.
Power-drawn drills or seeders. 4.
Areas in which the above methods are impractical may be seeded by hand methods.
When seeding by hand, the seed shall be incorporated into the top ¼ inch of soil by hand raking or other method that is allowed by the Engineer.
Seed applied using a hydroseeder shall have a tracer added to visibly aid uniform application. This tracer shall not be harmful to plant, aquatic, or animal life. If Short-Term
Mulch is used as a tracer, the application rate shall not exceed 250 pounds per acre.
Seed and fertilizer may be applied in one application provided that the fertilizer is placed in the hydroseeder tank no more than 1 hour prior to application. 8-01.3(2)C

Vacant 8-01.3(2)D
Temporary Mulching
Temporary mulch shall be straw, wood strand, or HECP mulch and shall be used for the purpose of erosion control by protecting bare soil surface from particle displacement.
Mulch shall not be applied below the anticipated water level of ditch slopes, pond bottoms, and stream banks. HECP mulch shall not be used within the Ordinary High
Water Mark. Non-HECP mulches applied below the anticipated water level shall be removed or anchored down so that it cannot move or float, at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency.
Straw or wood strand mulch shall be applied at a rate to achieve at least 95 percent visual blockage of the soil surface. Straw mulch shall be suitable for spreading with mulch blower equipment.
Short Term Mulch shall be hydraulically applied at the rate of 2500 pounds per acre and may be applied in one lift. Short-Term Mulch shall not be used in conjunction with permanent seeding.
Moderate Term Mulch and Long Term Mulch shall be hydraulically applied at the rate of
3500 pounds per acre with no more than 2000 pounds applied in a single lift. ModerateTerm Mulch shall not be used in conjunction with permanent seeding.
Mulch sprayed on signs or sign Structures shall be removed the same day.
Areas not accessible by mulching equipment shall be mulched by accepted hand methods. 8-01.3(2)E

Tackifiers
Tackifiers applied using a hydroseeder shall have a mulch tracer added to visibly aid uniform application. This tracer shall not be harmful to plant, aquatic, or animal life. A minimum of 125 pounds per acre and a maximum of 250 pounds per acre of Short-Term
Page 8-8
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01
Mulch shall be used as a tracer. Tackifier shall be mixed and applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Soil Binding Using Polyacrylamide (PAM) – The PAM shall be applied on bare soil completely dissolved and mixed in water or applied as a dry powder. Dissolved PAM shall be applied at a rate of not more than ⅔ pound per 1,000 gallons of water per acre. A minimum of 200 pounds per acre of Short-Term Mulch shall be applied with the dissolved
PAM. Dry powder applications may be at a rate of 5 pounds per acre using a hand-held fertilizer spreader or a tractor-mounted spreader.
PAM shall be applied only to areas that drain to completed sedimentation control BMPs in accordance with the TESC Plan. PAM may be reapplied on actively worked areas after a 48-hour period.
PAM shall not be applied during rainfall or to saturated soils. 8-01.3(3)

Placing Erosion Control Blanket
Erosion Control Blankets are used as an erosion prevention device and to enhance the establishment of vegetation. Erosion control blankets shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
When used to enhance the establishment of seeded areas, seeding and fertilizing shall be done prior to blanket installation.
Select erosion control blanket material for an area based on the intended function: slope or ditch stabilization, and site specific factors including soil, slope gradient, rainfall, and flow exposure. Erosion Control Blankets shall not be used on slopes or in ditches that exceed the manufacturer’s recommendations. 8-01.3(4)
Placing Compost Blanket
Compost blankets are used for erosion control. Compost blanket shall only be placed on ground surfaces that are steeper than 3-foot horizontal and 1-foot vertical though steeper slopes shall be broken by wattles or compost socks placed according to the Standard Plans.
Compost shall be placed to a depth of 3 inches over bare soil. An organic tackifier shall be placed over the entire composted area when dry or windy conditions are present or expected. The tackifier shall be applied immediately after the application of compost to prevent compost from leaving the composted area.
Medium compost shall be used for the compost blanket. Compost may serve the purpose of soil amendment as specified in Section 8-02.3(6). 8-01.3(5)
Plastic Covering
Erosion Control – Plastic coverings used to temporarily cover stockpiled materials, slopes or bare soils shall be installed and maintained in a way that prevents water from intruding under the plastic and prevents the plastic cover from being damaged by wind. Plastic coverings shall be placed with at least a 12-inch overlap of all seams and be a minimum of
6 mils thick. Soil stabilization and energy dissipation BMPs shall be used to minimize the erosive energy flows coming off sloped areas of plastic (e.g., toe of slope). When feasible, the Contractor shall prevent clean runoff from plastic from hitting bare soil. Flows from plastic shall be directed to stabilized outlet areas.
Containment – Plastic coverings used to line concrete washout areas, contain wastewaters, or used in secondary containment to prevent spills, shall be seamless to prevent infiltration and be a minimum of 10 mils thick.
Vegetation Management – Plastic covering shall be clear when placed over areas that have been seeded and shall be black when placed over areas where vegetation growth is to be inhibited. Plastic covering for vegetation management shall be a minimum of
4 mils thick.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-9 8-01 8-01.3(6)
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control
Check Dams
Check dams are used as an erosion and sediment control device in channels or conveyance areas. Check dams shall be installed as soon as construction will allow, or when directed by the Engineer. The Contractor may substitute a different check dam material, in lieu of what is specified in the contract, with approval of the Engineer. Straw bales shall not be used as check dams. The check dam is a temporary or permanent structure, built across a minor channel placed perpendicular to the flow of water. Water shall not flow freely through the check dam structure. Check dams shall be constructed in a manner that creates a ponding area upstream of the dam to allow pollutants to settle, with water from increased flows channeled over a spillway in the check dam. The check dam shall be constructed to prevent erosion in the area below the spillway. The outer edges shall extend up the sides of the conveyance to prevent water from going around the check dam. Check dams shall be of sufficient height to maximize detention, without causing water to leave the ditch.
Wattles, coir logs and compost sock used as check dams shall not be trenched in and shall be installed as shown in the Standard Plans.
When wattles, coir logs, and compost socks are used as check dams they shall be measured and paid as check dam in accordance with Section 8-01.4 and 8-01.5. 8-01.3(6)A
Coir Log
Coir logs are used as erosion and sediment control or bank stabilizing device. Coir logs shall be laid out, spaced, staked, and installed in accordance with the Standard Plans.
Live stakes can be used in addition to, but not as a replacement for, wooden stakes. 8-01.3(7)

Stabilized Construction Entrance
Temporary stabilized construction entrance shall be constructed in accordance with the
Standard Plans, prior to construction vehicles entering the roadway from locations that generate sediment track out on the roadway. Material used for stabilized construction entrance shall be free of extraneous materials that may cause or contribute to track out.
When the stabilized entrance no longer prevents track out of sediment or debris, the
Contractor shall either rehabilitate the existing entrance to original condition, or construct a new entrance.
When the Contract requires a tire wash in conjunction with the stabilized entrance, the
Contractor shall include details for the tire wash and the method for containing and treating the sediment-laden runoff as part of the TESC Plan. All vehicles leaving the site shall stop and wash sediment from their tires. 8-01.3(8)
Street Cleaning
Self-propelled pickup street sweepers shall be used to remove and collect sediment and other debris from the Roadway. The street sweeper shall effectively collect these materials and prevent them from being washed or blown off the Roadway or into waters of the State. Street sweepers shall not generate fugitive dust and shall be designed and operated in compliance with applicable air quality standards.
Material collected by the street sweeper shall be disposed of in accordance with
Section 2-03.3(7)C.
When allowed by the Engineer, power broom sweepers may be used in non-sensitive areas. The broom sweeper shall sweep dirt and other debris from the roadway into the work area. The swept material shall be prevented from entering or washing into waters of the State.
Street washing with water will require the concurrence of the Engineer.

Page 8-10
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.3(9) 8-01
Sediment Control Barriers
Sediment control barriers shall be installed in accordance with TESC Plan or manufacturer’s recommendations in the areas of clearing, grubbing, earthwork or drainage prior to starting those activities.
The sediment control barriers shall be maintained until the soils are stabilized. 8-01.3(9)A
Fencing 8-01.3(9)A1
High Visibility Fencing
High visibility fencing (HVF) shall be orange in color and installed along the site preservation lines shown in the Plans or as specified by the Engineer. Post spacing and attachment of the fencing material to the posts shall be as shown in the Standard Plans.
The HVF shall not be fastened to trees. 8-01.3(9)A2

Silt Fence
Silt fence shall be black in color and used as a sediment control device to prevent sediment laden water from leaving project boundaries, to manage stormwater within the site, or to create small detention areas. Silt fence shall be installed at locations shown in the Plans. The geotextile shall be securely attached to the posts and support system. Post spacing and attachments shall be as shown in the Standard Plans.
Geotextile material shall be sewn together at the point of manufacture, or at a location approved by the Engineer, to form geotextile lengths as required. All sewn seams and overlaps shall be located at a support post.
Posts shall be either wood or steel. Wood posts shall have minimum dimensions of 1¼ by 1¼ inches by the minimum length shown in the Plans.
When sediment deposits reach approximately ⅓ the height of the silt fence, the deposits shall be removed and stabilized in accordance with Section 8-01.3(15).
If trenching is not feasible due to rocky soils or not advisable due to proximity to a downslope sensitive area, a different sediment control device that does not require trenching shall be used in place of silt fence.
Backup support is needed for silt fence in areas where extra strength may be required, such as the toe of steep cut or fill slopes or areas where equipment may push excessive soils toward the fence. When backup support is used, wire shall have a maximum mesh spacing of 2 inches, and the plastic mesh shall be as resistant to ultraviolet radiation as the geotextile it supports. The strength of the wire or plastic mesh shall be equivalent to or greater than as required in Section 9-33.2(1), Table 6, for unsupported geotextile (i.e.,
180 lbs. grab tensile strength in the machine direction). Post spacing and attachments shall be as shown in the Standard Plans. 8-01.3(9)A3
High Visibility Silt Fence
High visibility silt fence (HVSF) shall be orange in color and only be used for the dual purpose of demarcating site preservation lines and a sediment control device in a location where high visibility mesh fence and black silt fence would otherwise be used together at same location. If use of HVSF is allowed the geotextile material shall meet the material requirements of Section 9-33.2(1), Table 6. Post spacing and attachments shall be as shown in the Standard Plans.
Backup support is needed for high visibility silt fence (HVSF) in areas where extra strength may be required, such as the toe of steep cut or fill slopes or areas where equipment may push excessive soils toward the sensitive or protected areas. When backup support is used, wire shall have a maximum mesh spacing of 2 inches, and the plastic mesh shall be as resistant to ultraviolet radiation as the geotextile it supports. The strength of the wire or plastic mesh shall be equivalent to or greater than as required in Section 9-33.2(1),
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 8-11 8-01
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control
Table 6, for unsupported geotextile (i.e., 180 lbs. grab tensile strength in the machine direction). Post spacing shall be as shown in the Standard Plans.
When sediment deposits reach approximately ⅓ the height of the silt fence, or 8 inches whichever is lower the deposits shall be removed and stabilized in accordance with
Section 8-01.3(15). 8-01.3(9)B
Gravel Filter, Wood Chip, or Compost Berm
Filter berms shall retain sediment and direct flows. The gravel filter berm shall be a minimum of 1 foot in height and shall be maintained at this height for the entire time they are in use. Rock material used for filter berms shall meet the grading requirements in
Section 9-03.9(2), but shall not include recycled materials as outlined in Section 9-03.21.
The wood chip berm shall be a minimum of 2 feet in height and shall be maintained at this height for the entire time they are in use.
The Compost Berm shall be constructed in accordance with the detail in the Plans.
Compost shall be Medium Compost. 8-01.3(9)C

Vacant 8-01.3(9)D
Inlet Protection
Inlet protection shall be installed below or above, or as a prefabricated cover at each inlet grate, as shown in the Plans. Inlet protection devices shall be installed prior to beginning clearing, grubbing, or earthwork activities.
Geotextile fabric in all prefabricated inlet protection devices shall meet or exceed the requirements of Section 9-33.2, Table 1, for Moderate Survivability, and the minimum filtration properties of Table 2.
When the depth of accumulated sediment and debris reaches approximately ½ the height of an internal device or ⅓ the height of the external device (or less when so specified by the manufacturers), or as designated by the Engineer, the deposits shall be removed and stabilized on‑site in accordance with Section 8-01.3(16).
Below Inlet Grate
Below Inlet Grate devices shall be prefabricated units specifically designed for inlet protection and shall remain securely attached to the drainage Structure when fully loaded with sediment and debris, or at the maximum level of sediment and debris specified by the manufacturer.
Above Inlet Grate
Above Inlet Grate devices may be silt fence, sandbags, or prefabricated units specifically designed for inlet protection.
The device shall remain securely in place around the drainage Structure under all conditions.
Inlet Grate Cover
Inlet Grate Cover devices shall be prefabricated units specifically designed for inlet protection and have the following features: 1.

Be a sewn geotextile fabric unit fitted to the individual grate and completely enclosing the grate. 2.
Have built-in lifting devices to allow manual access of the stormwater system. 3.
Utilize an orange monofilament geotextile fabric.
Check dams or functionally equivalent devices may be used as inlet protection devices with the approval of the Engineer.
Page 8-12
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.3(10) 8-01
Wattles
Wattles are used as a flow control and sediment control device. Wattles shall be installed as soon as construction will allow or when designated by the Engineer. Wattle installation and trenching shall begin from the base of the slope and work uphill prior to topsoil or compost placement. Excavated material from trenching shall be spread evenly along the uphill slope and be compacted using hand tamping or other method approved by the
Engineer. On gradually sloped or clay-type soils trenches shall be 2 to 3 inches deep. On loose soils, in high rainfall areas, or on steep slopes, trenches shall be 3 to 5 inches deep, or half the thickness of the wattle, whichever is greater.
Wattles shall be laid out, spaced, and staked in accordance with the Standard Plans.
Live stakes can be used in addition to, but not as a replacement for, wooden stakes. If trenching and staking is not possible due to rocky soils, compost socks shall be used instead of wattles.
The Contractor shall exercise care when installing wattles to ensure the method of installation minimizes the disturbance of waterways and prevents sediment or pollutant discharge into water bodies. 8-01.3(11)

Outlet Protection
Outlet protection shall prevent scour at the outlets of ponds, pipes, ditches or other conveyances. All quarry spall material used for outlet protection shall be free of extraneous material and meet the gradation requirements in Section 9-13.1(5). 8-01.3(12)
Compost Sock
Compost socks are used to disperse flow and sediment. Compost socks shall be installed as soon as construction will allow but before flow conditions create erosive flows or discharges from the site. Compost socks shall be installed prior to mulching or compost placement. Compost socks shall be laced together end-to-end with coir rope or ends shall be securely overlapped to create a continuous length. Terminal ends of the continuous length shall be curved 2 to 4 feet upward into the slope to prevent concentrated flows from going around the terminal ends. Finished grades shall be of a natural appearance with smooth transitions. Compost for compost socks shall be Medium Compost.
Compost socks shall be laid out, spaced and staked in accordance with the Standard Plans.
Live stakes can be used in addition to, but not as a replacement for, wooden stakes. If staking is not possible or if the compost sock is being used on concrete, heavy blocks or an equivalent item shall be used to weigh down and secure the sock.
The Contractor shall exercise care when installing compost socks to ensure that the method of installation minimizes disturbance of waterways and prevents sediment or pollutant discharge into water bodies. Stakes shall be removed to minimize soil disturbance. 8-01.3(13)
Temporary Curb
Temporary curbs shall divert or redirect water around erodible soils.
Temporary curbs shall be installed along pavement edges to prevent runoff from flowing onto erodible slopes. Water shall be directed to areas where erosion can be controlled.
Temporary curbs shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height. Temporary curb shall be installed so that ponding does not occur in the adjacent roadway. 8-01.3(14)

Temporary Pipe Slope Drain
Temporary pipe slope drain shall be Corrugated Polyethylene Drain Pipe and shall be constructed in accordance with the Plans.
Water interceptor dikes or temporary curbs shall be used to direct water into pipe slope drain. The entrance to the drain may consist of a prefabricated funnel device specifically designed for application, rock, sand bags, or as approved by the Engineer.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-13 8-01
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control
The pipe fittings shall be water tight and the pipe secured to the slope with metal posts, wood stakes, or sand bags.
The water shall be discharged to a stabilized conveyance, sediment trap, stormwater pond, rock splash pad, or vegetated strip, in a manner to prevent erosion and maintain water quality compliance. 8-01.3(15)
Maintenance

Erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be maintained or adaptively managed as required by the CSWGP until the Engineer determines they are no longer needed. When deficiencies in functional performance are identified, the deficiencies shall be rectified immediately.
The BMPs shall be inspected on the schedule outlined in Section 8-01.3(1)B for damage and sediment deposits. Damage to or undercutting of BMPs shall be repaired immediately.
In areas where the Contractor’s activities have compromised the erosion control functions of the existing grasses, the Contractor shall overseed at no additional cost to the
Contracting Agency.
The quarry spalls of construction entrances shall be refreshed, replaced, or screened to maintain voids between the spalls for collecting mud and dirt.
Unless otherwise specified, when the depth of accumulated sediment and debris reaches approximately ⅓ the height of the BMP the deposits shall be removed. Debris or contaminated sediment shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 2-03.3(7)C. Clean sediments may be stabilized on-site using BMPs as allowed by the Engineer. 8-01.3(16)
Removal
The Contractor shall remove all temporary BMPs, all associated hardware and associated accumulated sediment deposition from the project limits prior to Physical Completion unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer. When the temporary BMP materials are made of natural plant fibers unaltered by synthetic materials the Engineer may allow leaving the
BMP in place.
The Contractor shall remove BMPs and associated hardware in a way that minimizes soil disturbance. The Contractor shall permanently stabilize all bare and disturbed soil after removal of BMPs. If the installation and use of the erosion control BMPs have compacted or otherwise rendered the soil inhospitable to plant growth, such as construction entrances, the Contractor shall take measures to rehabilitate the soil to facilitate plant growth. This may include, but is not limited to, ripping the soil, incorporating soil amendments, or seeding with the specified seed.
At the request of the Contractor and at the sole discretion of the Engineer the CSWGP may be transferred back to the Contracting Agency. Approval of the Transfer of Coverage request will require the following: 1.

All other Work required for Contract Completion has been completed. 2.
All Work required for compliance with the CSWGP has been completed to the maximum extent possible. This includes removal of BMPs that are no longer needed and the site has undergone all Stabilization identified for meeting the requirements of
Final Stabilization in the CSWGP. 3.
An Equitable Adjustment change order for the cost of Work that has not been completed by the Contractor. 4.
Submittal of the Washington State Department of Ecology Transfer of Coverage form (Ecology Form ECY 020-87a) to the Engineer.
If the Engineer approves the transfer of coverage back to the Contracting Agency the requirement in Section 1-07.5(3) for the Contractor’s submittal of the Notice of
Termination form to Ecology will not apply.
Page 8-14
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.4 8-01.4(1) 8-01
Measurement
Lump Sum Bid for Project (No Unit Items)
When the Bid Proposal contains the item “Erosion Control and Water Pollution
Prevention” there will be no measurement of unit or force account items for Work defined in Section 8-01 except as described in Sections 8-01.4(3) and 8-01.4(4). Also, except as described in Section 8-01.4(3), all of Sections 8-01.4(2) and 8-01.5(2) are deleted. 8-01.4(2)
Item Bids
When the Proposal does not contain the items “Erosion Control and Water Pollution
Prevention”, Sections 8-01.4(1) and 8-01.5(1) are deleted and the Bid Proposal will contain some or all of the following items measured as noted.
ESC lead will be measured per day for each day that an inspection is made and a report is filed.
Erosion control blanket and plastic covering will be measured by the square yard along the ground slope line of surface area covered and accepted.
Turbidity curtains will be measured by the linear foot along the ground line of the installed curtain.
Check dams will be measured per linear foot one time only along the ground line of the completed check dam. No additional measurement will be made for check dams that are required to be rehabilitated or replaced due to wear.
Stabilized construction entrances will be measured by the square yard by ground slope measurement for each entrance constructed.
Tire wash facilities will be measured per each for each tire wash installed.
Street cleaning will be measured by the hour for the actual time spent cleaning pavement, refilling with water, dumping and transport to and from cleaning locations within the project limits, as authorized by the Engineer. Time to mobilize the equipment to or from the project limits on which street cleaning is required will not be measured.
Inlet protections will be measured per each for each initial installation at a drainage structure.
Silt fence, gravel filter, compost berms, and wood chip berms will be measured by the linear foot along the ground line of the completed barrier.
Wattles and compost socks will be measured by the linear foot.
Temporary curbs will be measured by the linear foot along the ground line of the completed installation.
Temporary pipe slope drains will be measured by the linear foot along the flow line of the pipe.
Coir logs will be measured by the linear foot along the ground line of the completed installation.
Outlet protections will be measured per each initial installation at an outlet location.
Temporary seeding, temporary mulching, and tackifiers will be measured by the acre by ground slope measurement.
Compost blanket will be measured by the square yard by ground slope surface area covered and accepted.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-15 8-01
Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.4(3)
Reinstating Unit Items with Lump Sum Erosion Control and
Water Pollution Prevention
The Contract Provisions may establish the project as lump sum, in accordance with
Section 8-01.4(1) and also include one or more of the items included above in Section 8-01.4(2). When that occurs, the corresponding measurement provision in Section 8-01.4(2) is not deleted and the Work under that item will be measured as specified. 8-01.4(4)
Items not included with Lump Sum Erosion Control and Water
Pollution Prevention

Compost blanket will be measured by the square yard by ground slope surface area covered and accepted.
Temporary mulch will be measured by the acre by ground slope surface area covered and accepted.
High visibility fence will be measured by the linear foot along the ground line of the completed fence. 8-01.5
Payment 8-01.5(1)
Lump Sum Bid for Project (No Unit Items)
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when it is included in the Proposal: “Erosion Control and Water Pollution Prevention”, lump sum.
The lump sum Contract price for “Erosion Control and Water Pollution Prevention” shall be full pay to perform the Work as described in Section 8-01 except for costs compensated by Bid Proposal items inserted through Contract Provisions as described in
Section 8-01.4(2). Progress payments for the lump sum item “Erosion Control and Water
Pollution Prevention” will be made as follows: 1.
The Contracting Agency will pay 15 percent of the bid amount for the initial set up for the item. Initial set up includes the following: a.

Acceptance of the TESC Plan provided by the Contracting Agency or submittal of a new TESC Plan, b.
Submittal of a schedule for the installation of the BMPs, c.
Identifying water quality sampling locations, and 2.
Seventy percent of the bid amount will be paid in accordance with Section 1-09.9. 3.
Once the project is physically complete and copies of the all reports submitted to
Ecology have been submitted to the Engineer, and, if applicable, transference of the
CSWGP back to the Contracting Agency is complete, the remaining 15 percent of the bid amount shall be paid in accordance with Section 1-09.9.
Page 8-16
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control 8-01.5(2) 8-01
Item Bids “ESC Lead”, per day. “Turbidity Curtain”, per linear foot. “Erosion Control Blanket”, per square yard. “Plastic Covering”, per square yard. “Check Dam”, per linear foot. “Inlet Protection”, per each. “Gravel Filter Berm”, per linear foot. “Stabilized Construction Entrance”, per square yard.” “Tire Wash”, per each. “Street Cleaning”, per hour. “Silt Fence”, per linear foot. “Wood Chip Berm”, per linear foot. “Compost Berm”, per linear foot. “Wattle”, per linear foot. “Compost Sock”, per linear foot. “Coir Log”, per linear foot. “Temporary Curb”, per linear foot. “Temporary Pipe Slope Drain”, per linear foot. “Temporary Seeding”, per acre. “Temporary Mulching”, per acre. “Compost Blanket”, per square yard. “Outlet Protection”, per each. “Tackifier”, per acre. “Erosion/Water Pollution Control”, by force account as provided in Section 1-09.6.
Maintenance and removal of erosion and water pollution control devices including removal and disposal of sediment, stabilization and rehabilitation of soil disturbed by these activities, and all additional Work deemed necessary by the Engineer to control erosion and water pollution will be paid by force account in accordance with Section 1-09.6.
To provide a common Proposal for all Bidders, the Contracting Agency has entered an amount in the Proposal to become a part of the Contractor’s total Bid. 8-01.5(3)
Reinstating Unit Items with Lump Sum Erosion Control and
Water Pollution Prevention
The Contract may establish the project as lump sum, in accordance with Section 8-01.4(1) and also reinstate the measurement of one or more of the items described in Section 8-01.4(2), except for Erosion/Water Pollution Control, by force account. When that occurs, the corresponding payment provision in Section 8-01.5(2) is not deleted and the
Work under that item will be paid as specified. 8-01.5(4)
Items not included with Lump Sum Erosion Control and
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when it is included in the Proposal: “High Visibility Fence”, per linear foot.
The unit contract price per linear foot for “High Visibility Fence” shall be full pay for all costs to obtain, install, maintain, and remove the fence as specified. Once removed, the fencing shall remain the property of the Contractor.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-17 8-02
Roadside Restoration 8-02 8-02.1
Roadside Restoration
Description
This Work consists of preserving, maintaining, establishing and augmenting vegetation on the roadsides and within mitigation or sundry site areas. It includes vegetation preservation, weed and pest control, furnishing and placing topsoil, compost, and soil amendments, and furnishing and planting seed, sod and plants of all forms and container types. It includes performing plant establishment activities and soil bioengineering. Work shall be performed in accordance with these Specifications and as shown in the Plans or as designated by the Engineer.
Trees, whips, shrubs, ground covers, cuttings, live stakes, live poles, live branches, rhizomes, tubers, rootstock, and seedlings will hereinafter be referred to collectively as “plants” or “plant material”. Grass, wildflowers, and other plant materials installed in seed form will hereinafter be referred to collectively as “seed”. 8-02.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Topsoil
Seed
Fertilizer
Mulch and Amendments
Erosion Control Devices
Plant Materials
Stakes, Guys, and Wrapping
Water

9-14.2 9-14.3 9-14.4 9-14.5 9-14.6 9-14.7 9-14.8 9-25.2
Botanical identification and nomenclature of plant materials shall be based on descriptions by Hitchcock and Cronquist in “Flora of the Pacific Northwest”. Botanical identification and nomenclature of plant material not found in "Flora" shall be based on Bailey in “Hortus Third” or superseding editions and amendments or as referenced in the Plans. 8-02.3 8-02.3(1)
Construction Requirements
Responsibility During Construction
The Contractor shall prepare, install, and ensure adequate and proper care of all roadside seeded, planted, and lawn areas on the project until all plant establishment periods required by the Contract are complete or until Physical Completion of the project, whichever is last.
Adequate and proper care shall include, but is not limited to, keeping all plant material in a healthy, growing condition by watering, pruning, and other actions deemed necessary for plant health. This Work shall include keeping the project area free from insect infestation, weeds or unwanted vegetation, litter, and other debris along with retaining the finished grades and mulch in a neat uniform condition.
Existing desirable vegetation shall be saved and protected unless removal is required by the Contract or allowed by the Engineer.
The Contractor shall have sole responsibility for the maintenance and appearance of the roadside restoration. 8-02.3(2)
Work Plans
Three Work Plan submittals under this section: 1.

Roadside Work Plan: This plan is required when Work will disturb the roadside beyond 20 feet from the pavement or where trees or native vegetation will be removed. The Contractor shall submit a Type 3 Working Drawing within 15 calendar days prior to any earth disturbing activities.
Page 8-18
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02 2.
Weed and Pest Control Plan: This plan is required when the proposal requires the use of chemicals, weed control activities or when the proposal contains the item “Project
Area Weed and Pest Control”. The Contractor shall submit for approval the Weed and Pest Control Plan as a Type 3 Working Drawing. The plan shall be submitted at the same time as the Roadside Work Plan. The plan will require approval prior to beginning the following additional activities: selective clearing, surface preparation, application of chemical pesticides, or any weed control activities. 3.
Plant Establishment Plan: This plan is required when the proposal contains the item “PSIPE__”, and prior to completion of Initial Planting. The Contractor shall submit a
Type 2 Working Drawing. 8-02.3(2)A
Roadside Work Plan
The Roadside Work Plan shall define the expected impacts to the roadside and restoration resulting from Work necessary to meet all Contract requirements. The Contractor shall define how the roadside restoration Work included in the Contract will be phased and coordinated with project Work such as earthwork, staging, access, erosion and water pollution control, irrigation, etc. The Roadside Work Plan shall include the following: 1.

2. 3.
Limiting impacts to roadsides: a.
Limits of Work including locations of staging or parking. b.
Means and methods for vegetation protection (in accordance with
Section 1-07.16(2)). c.
Locations outside of clearing limits where vegetation shall be removed to provide access routes or other needs to accomplish the Work. d.
Plans for removal, preservation and stockpile of topsoil or other native materials, if outside of clearing and grubbing limits and within the project limits.
Roadside Restoration: a.
Plan for propagation and procurement of plants, ground preparation for planting, and installation of plants. b.
Means and methods to limit soil compaction where seeding and planting are to occur, such as steel plates, hog fuel access roads, wood mats for sensitive areas (including removal) and decompaction for unavoidable impacts.

c.
Plan and timing to incorporate or remove erosion control items.
Lawn Installation: a.
Schedule for lawn installation Work. b.
Establishment and maintenance of lawns. 8-02.3(2)B
Weed and Pest Control Plan
The Weed and Pest Control Plan shall describe all weed and pest control needs for the project.
The plan shall be prepared and signed by a licensed Commercial Pest Control Operator or
Consultant. The plan for control of weeds and pests on the Contract in accordance with
Section 8-02.3(3) shall include the following: 1.

Names of plan preparer and pesticide operators, including contact information. The
Contractor shall provide the Engineer evidence that all operators are licensed with appropriate endorsements, and that the pesticide used is registered for use by the
Washington State Department of Agriculture. 2.
Means and methods of weed control, including mechanical and/or chemical. The
Contractor shall provide a site plan indicating where the noted methods of weed control will be implemented.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-19 8-02
Roadside Restoration 3.
Schedule and timing for weed control including re-entry times for pesticide application by pesticide type.

4.
Proposed pesticide use in accordance with Section 8-02.3(3)A: name, application rate, and Safety Data Sheets of all proposed pesticides. The Contractor shall provide a copy of the current product label for each pesticide to be used. 5.
Plan to ensure worker safety until pesticide re-entry periods are met. 6.
Site management and control protocol for all anticipated pests including herbivory (browse and girdling), fungal and insect infestations, and all applicable aquatic invasive species per RCW 77.135.010. Document equipment cleaning and/or sterilization protocols in accordance with Section 1-05.9, including provisions to prevent the spread of listed species. 7.
The Contractor shall provide a copy of the Traffic Control Plan for accessing the site to ensure the safety of all staff during the process of taking materials on and off the site. 8-02.3(2)C
Plant Establishment Plan
The Plant Establishment Plan shall describe activities necessary to ensure continued health and vigor of planted and seeded areas in accordance with the requirements of
Sections 8-02.3(12) and 8-02.3(13). Should the plan become unworkable at any time during the first-year plant establishment, the Contractor shall submit a revised plan prior to proceeding with further Work. The Plant Establishment Plan shall include: 1.
Proposed scheduling of joint inspection meetings, activities, materials, equipment to be utilized for the first-year plant establishment. 2.
Proposed adaptive management activities to ensure successful establishment of seeded, sodded, and planted areas.

3.
A contact person for the duration of the contract. 4.
Management of the irrigation system or watering plan. 8-02.3(3)
Weed and Pest Control
The Contractor shall control weed and pest species within the project area using integrated pest management principles consisting of mechanical, biological, and chemical controls that are outlined in the Weed and Pest Control Plan or as designated by the Engineer. Controlling weeds consists of killing and removing weeds by chemical, mechanical, and hand methods. 8-02.3(3)A
Chemical Pesticides
Chemical pesticides include, but are not restricted to, any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest, including but not limited to, insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, adjuvants, and additives, including plant regulators, defoliants and desiccants. The Contractor shall apply chemical pesticides in accordance with the label recommendations, the Washington State Department of
Ecology, local sensitive area ordinances, and Washington State Department of Agriculture laws and regulations. Only those pesticides listed in the table Herbicides Approved for Use on WSDOT Rights of Way and accepted as part of the Weed and Pest Control
Plan or by written authorization from the Engineer may be used (https://wsdot.wa.gov/ construction-planning/protecting-environment/maintaining-vegetation-along-ourhighways/using-herbicides).
All personnel applying chemical pesticides within the project limits, including off-site mitigation, staging, and stockpile areas, shall be licensed by the State of Washington as a
Commercial Applicator or Commercial Operator, with additional endorsements as required by the Special Provisions, physical work locations, or the proposed Weed and Pest Control
Plan. All licenses and endorsements shall be current and in good standing for the duration
Page 8-20

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02 of the project. All chemical pesticides shall be delivered to the job site in the original containers, or if pre-mixed off-site, a certification of the components and formulation from the supplier is required. The licensed applicator or operator shall complete WSDOT
Form 540-509, Commercial Pesticide Application Record, each day the pesticide is applied and furnish a copy to the Engineer by the following business day.
The Contractor shall ensure confinement of the chemicals within the designated areas.
The use of spray chemical pesticides shall require the use of anti-drift and activating agents and a spray pattern indicator unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer.
The Contractor shall assume all responsibility for rendering any area unsatisfactory for planting by reason of chemical application. Damage to adjacent areas, either on or off the
Highway Right of Way, shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Engineer or the property owner at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency. 8-02.3(3)B
Roadside Seeding, Planting and Lawn Area Weed Control
Seeding, planting and lawn area weed control consists of controlling weeds and pests in seeded, planted and lawn areas shown in the Plans. This Work is included in the bid items for seeding, planting and lawn installation.
All seeding, planting and lawn areas shall be prepared so that they are weed and debris free at the time of planting and until completion of the project. The planting areas shall include the entire ground surface, regardless of cover, areas around plants, and those areas shown in the Plans.
Within seeding, planting or lawn areas, all species that are not shown in the Plans are unwanted and shall be controlled unless specifically allowed by the Engineer to remain.
Grass growing within the mulch ring of a plant, including grass applied in accordance with Sections 8-01.3(2), 8-02.3(9) or 8-02.3(10), shall be considered a weed and shall be controlled on the project in accordance with the weed and pest control plan.
All applications of post-emergent herbicides shall be made while green and growing tissue is present. Residual herbicides shall not be used where rhizomatous species or perennial species are indicated.
Should unwanted vegetation reach the flowering and seed stage in violation of these
Specifications, the Contractor shall physically remove and bag the seed heads prior to seed dispersion. All physically removed vegetation and seed heads shall be disposed of off-site at no cost to the Contracting Agency. 8-02.3(3)C

Project Area Weed and Pest Control
When the Bid Item “Project Area Weed and Pest Control” is included in the Contract the
Contractor shall control all noxious weeds as directed by the Engineer within the project limits and not otherwise covered in Section 8-02.3(3)B. Noxious weeds are specified by the Washington State Department of Agriculture, the local Weed District, or the County
Noxious Weed Control Board. 8-02.3(4)
Topsoil
Topsoil shall not be worked or placed when the ground or topsoil is frozen, or excessively wet.
The Contractor shall protect topsoil stockpiled for project use to prevent erosion and weed growth. Weed growth on topsoil stockpile sites shall be immediately eliminated in accordance with the accepted Weed and Pest Control Plan and Section 8-02.3(3).
The subsoil where topsoil is to be placed shall be tilled to a depth of 1 foot or as specified in the Special Provisions or the Plans. Topsoil of the type specified shall be evenly spread over the specified areas to the depth shown in the Plans or as otherwise ordered by the Engineer. Topsoil depths greater than 6 inches shall be placed in lifts no more than
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-21 8-02
Roadside Restoration
6 inches in depth. The first lift of topsoil shall be incorporated with sub-soil to a depth of
8 inches and subsequent lifts placed and lightly tamped between lifts. After the topsoil has been spread, all large clods, hard lumps, and rocks 2 inches in diameter and larger, and litter shall be raked up, removed, and disposed. 8-02.3(4)A
Topsoil Type A
Topsoil Type A shall be as specified in the Special Provisions. The Contractor shall submit a certification by the supplier that the contents of the Topsoil meet the requirements in the
Special Provisions. 8-02.3(4)B
Topsoil Type B
Topsoil Type B shall be taken from within the project limits. Topsoil Type B shall be taken from areas shown in the Plans to the designated depth and stockpiled at locations that will not interfere with the construction of the project, and outside of sensitive areas, as allowed by the Engineer. The general limits of the material to be utilized for topsoil will be indicated in the Plans or in the Special Provisions. The Engineer will make the final determination of the areas where the most suitable material exists within these general limits. Material for Topsoil Type B shall not be taken from a depth greater than 1 foot from the existing ground unless otherwise designated by the Engineer. Prior to topsoil removal, the Contractor shall reduce the native vegetation to a height not exceeding
1 foot. A minimum of two weeks prior to excavation of Topsoil Type B, the Contractor shall pre-treat the vegetation on the designated Topsoil Type B areas according to the
Weed and Pest Control Plan. Areas beyond the slope stakes shall be disturbed as little as possible in the above operations and under no circumstances shall Topsoil Type B be stockpiled within 10 feet of any existing tree or vegetation area designated to be saved and protected. The Contractor shall protect topsoil stockpile from weed infestation.
The Contractor shall set aside sufficient material to satisfy the needs of the project.
Upon completion of topsoil placement, the Contractor shall dispose of remaining stockpiled Topsoil Type B not required for use on the project at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency in accordance with Section 2-03.3(7)C.
Should a shortage of Topsoil Type B occur, and the Contractor has wasted or otherwise disposed of topsoil material, the Contractor shall furnish Topsoil Type A or C at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. 8-02.3(4)C

Topsoil Type C
Topsoil Type C shall be naturally occurring topsoil obtained from a source provided by the Contractor outside of the Contracting Agency-owned Right of Way. Topsoil Type C shall meet the requirements of Sections 8-02.3(4) and 8-02.3(4)B. The Contractor shall not begin removal of Topsoil Type C from the proposed source until the material has been allowed for use by the Engineer. 8-02.3(5)
Roadside Seeding, Lawn and Planting Area Preparation
This Work includes preparing worked areas for the installation of all types of permanent erosion control planting. Work shall be conducted so the flow lines in drainage channels are maintained. Material displaced by the Contractor’s operations that interferes with drainage shall be removed from the channel and disposed of as allowed by the Engineer. 8-02.3(5)A
Seeding Area Preparation
The Contractor shall prepare roadside seeding areas as follows: 1.
Remove all excess material, debris, stumps, and rocks greater than 3 inches in diameter from areas to be seeded. Dispose of removed materials offsite. 2.
Prepare roadside seeding area to a weed free and bare condition.
Page 8-22
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02 3.
Bring area to uniform grade and install topsoil, soil amendments, or compost as shown in the Plans. Do not till any slopes stepper than 2(H) to 1(V). 4.
Compact to provide a reasonably firm but friable seedbed; tractor walk to uniformly cover the surface with longitudinal depressions at least 2 inches deep formed perpendicular to the natural flow of water on the slope. Condition the soil with sufficient water so the longitudinal depressions remain in the soil surface until completion of the seeding. 5.
Seed and mulch within two days of preparation. 8-02.3(5)B
Lawn Area Preparation
The Contractor shall prepare lawn areas as follows: 1.
Prepare lawn area to a weed free and bare condition in accordance with
Section 8-02.3(3)B. 2.
Remove excess material, stumps, wood or rocks over 3 inches in diameter and remove from site. 3.
Bring area to uniform grade and install topsoil or soil amendments in accordance with
Section 8-02.3(4) and 8-02.3(6).

4.
Till to an 8-inch depth, rake to a smooth even grade without low areas that trap water, and compact with a 50-pound roller. The finished grade of the soil shall be
1 inch below the top of all curbs, junction and valve boxes, walks, driveways, and other Structures. 5.
Seed or sod the area within two days of preparation. 8-02.3(5)C
Planting Area Preparation
The Contractor shall prepare planting areas as follows: 1.
Prepare planting area to a weed free and bare condition in accordance with
Section 8-02.3(3). 2.
When indicated in the plans or Special Provisions, soil shall be decompacted to a depth of 18 inches and returned to uniform grade even with surrounding areas, leaving no holes or mounds over 3 inches in depth or height. Any areas impacted by construction activities not in accordance with the Roadside Work Plan shall be decompacted. 3.
Remove excess material, stumps, wood or rocks over 3 inches in diameter and remove from site.

4.
Install topsoil, compost or soil amendments as indicated in the plans and in accordance with Sections 8-02.3(4) and 8-02.3(6). 5.
Till amendments to a depth of 12 inches or as indicated in the plans to provide a reasonably firm but friable planting area. Do not till any slopes steeper than 2(H) to 1(V). 6.
Return soil to a uniform finished grade, 1 inch, or the specified depth of mulch plus
1 inch, below walks, curbs, junction and valve boxes, catch basins, and driveways, unless otherwise specified. 7.
Begin planting and mulching the area within two days of final preparation. 8-02.3(6)
Mulch and Amendments
The Contractor shall place soil amendments of the type, quality, and quantities specified where shown in the Plans or as specified in the Special Provisions. Areas receiving soil amendments shall be bare soil or vegetation free prior to application. All soil amendments shall be installed as shown in the Plans within 30 calendar days after delivery to the project site.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-23 8-02 8-02.3(6)A
Roadside Restoration
Compost
Soil amendment shall be Fine Compost unless otherwise designated in the Plans. When compost blanket is used for temporary erosion control, the compost blanket may be incorporated into the soil immediately prior to planting when used as compost soil amendment. The area shall be prepared in accordance with Section 8-02.3(5) prior to placing compost. 8-02.3(6)B
Fertilizers
The Contractor shall apply fertilizer in the form, mixture, and rate specified in the
Special Provisions or as directed by the Engineer. Application procedures shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations unless otherwise specified in the
Special Provisions.
The Contractor shall submit a guaranteed fertilizer analysis label for the selected product a minimum of one week prior to application for acceptance. Following the
Engineer’s acceptance, fertilizing of the accepted ground or vegetated surfaces shall begin immediately.
In seeding and lawn areas to be fertilized, the fertilizer shall be applied concurrently with the seed. When fertilizer is hydraulically applied, the fertilizer shall be suitable for application with seeding as specified in Section 8-02.3(9)C. If hydroseeding, the fertilizer shall be placed in the hydroseeder tank no more than 1 hour prior to application.
Fertilizers for planting areas shall be applied concurrently with compost and applied prior to incorporation, unless tablet form fertilizer is specified. Where tablet form fertilizer is specified, fertilizer shall be applied concurrently with plant installation.
Fertilizer sprayed on signs or sign structures shall be removed the same day.
Areas not accessible by fertilizing equipment shall be fertilized by allowed hand methods.
Second Application: A second application of fertilizer shall be applied as specified in the
Special Provisions at the locations designated in the Plans. The fertilizer shall be applied during the months of March, April, or May of the following year after the initial seeding, planting, or lawn installation. The fertilizer shall be dry granular pellets or pearls and applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations or as specified in the 8-02.3(7)

Layout of Planting, Lawn and Seeding Areas
The Contractor shall lay out and prepare planting and lawn areas and receive the
Engineer’s acceptance of layout and preparation prior to any installation activities. The
Contractor shall stake the location of all trees larger than 1-inch caliper and the perimeter of all planting areas for acceptance by the Engineer prior to any installation activities.
The Contractor shall locate all trees to be planted in mowable grass areas a minimum of
10 feet from the edge of planting areas, other trees, fence lines, and bottom of ditches unless otherwise specified.
Tree locations shown in the Plans shall be considered approximate unless shown with stationing and offset distance. In irrigated areas, trees shall be located so their trunk is a minimum of ⅓ of the spray radius away from the nearest sprinkler head.
Unless otherwise shown, planting areas located adjacent to Roadways shall begin 6 feet from the edge of shoulder on roadway fills and begin 5 feet up on the back slope from the bottom on roadway cut sections. Plants within planting areas shall be located such that mature branching pattern will not block sight distance, signs, or other traffic-related devices. No trees shall be placed where the mature canopy will grow to within 10 feet of existing power lines. Where roadside ditches are present, planting areas shall begin 5 feet from the centerline of the ditch unless shown otherwise in the Plans.
Page 8-24
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02 8-02.3(8)
Planting 8-02.3(8)A
Dates and Conditions for Planting
The Contracting Agency will make an inspection of plant material at the source when requested by the Engineer. However, such preliminary approval shall not be considered as final acceptance for payment. Final inspection and approval (or rejection) will only occur when the plant material has been delivered to the Contract site. The Contractor shall notify the Engineer, not less than 48 hours in advance, of plant material delivery to the project.
No plant material shall be planted until it has been inspected and accepted for planting by the Engineer. Rejected material shall be removed from the project site immediately.
All plants for the project or a sufficient quantity to plant one acre of the site, whichever is less, shall be received on site prior to the Engineer beginning inspection of the plants.
Plants delivered as a single unit of 25 or less of the same size, species, and variety, shall be clearly marked and tagged. Plants delivered in large quantities of more than 25 must be segregated as to variety, grade, and size; and one plant in each 25, or fraction thereof, of each variety, grade, and size shall be tagged. Within 30 calendar days of Execution of Contract, the Contractor shall provide written evidence to the Engineer that plant materials have been contracted or procured. No substitution of plant material, species or variety, will be permitted unless evidence is submitted in writing to the Engineer that a specified plant cannot be obtained and has been unobtainable since the Award of the
Contract. If substitution is permitted, it can be made only with written approval by the
Engineer. The nearest variety, size, and grade, as approved by the Engineer, shall then be furnished.
Container or balled and burlapped plant material may be substituted for bare root plant material. Container grown plant material may be substituted for balled and burlapped plant materials. When substitution is allowed, use current ASNS standards to determine the correct rootball volume (container or balled and burlapped) of the substituted material that corresponds to that of the specified material. These substitutions shall be approved by the Engineer and be at no cost to the Contracting Agency.
Plants stored under temporary conditions prior to installation shall be the responsibility of the Contractor.
Plants stored on the project shall be protected at all times from extreme weather conditions by insulating the roots, root balls, or containers with sawdust, soil, compost, bark or wood chips, or other approved material and shall be kept moist at all times prior to planting.
Cuttings shall continually be shaded and protected from wind. Cuttings shall be protected from drying at all times and shall be heeled into moist soil or other insulating material or placed in water if not installed within 8 hours of cutting. Cuttings to be stored for later installation shall be bundled, laid horizontally, and completely buried under 6 inches of water, moist soil or placed in cold storage at a temperature of 34°F and 90 percent humidity. Cuttings that are not planted within 24 hours of cutting shall be soaked in water for 24 hours prior to planting. Cuttings taken when the temperature is higher than 50°F shall not be stored for later use. Cuttings that already have developed roots shall not be used.
Under no circumstances will planting be permitted during unsuitable soil or weather conditions as determined by the Engineer. Unsuitable conditions may include frozen soil, freezing weather, saturated soil, standing water, drought, high winds, heavy rains, and high water levels. All planting shall be accomplished during the following periods:

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-25 8-02 1. 2.
Roadside Restoration
Non-Irrigated Plant Material
Western Washington (West of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
Eastern Washington (East of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
October 1 through March 1
October 1 through November 15
Irrigated Plant Material
In irrigated areas, plant material shall not be installed until the irrigation system is fully operational and accepted by the Engineer. Trees and shrubs may be planted in irrigated areas during the non-irrigated planting window before the irrigation system is functional with the written concurrence of the Engineer only if the irrigation system is guaranteed to be operational prior to the end of the non-irrigated planting window.

8-02.3(8)B
Plant Installation
The Contractor shall handle plant material in the following manner: 1.
Root systems shall be kept covered and damp at all times. Plant material shall be kept in containers until the time of planting. 2.
Roots shall not be bunched, curled, twisted, or unreasonably bent when placed in the planting hole. Bare root plant material shall be dormant at the time of harvesting and planting. The root systems of all bare root plant material shall be dipped in a slurry immediately prior to planting. 3.
Plant material supplied in wrapped balls shall not be removed from the wrapping until the time of planting at the planting location. The root system of balled plant material shall be moist at the time of planting. Root balls shall be loosened prior to planting. All burlap, baskets, string, wire and other such materials shall be removed from the hole when planting balled plants. 4.
Plant cutting material shall be dormant at the time of cutting and planting. All cuttings shall be installed immediately if buds begin to swell. 5.
Plants shall be placed with the crown at the finished grade. In their final position, plants shall have their top true root (not adventitious root) no more than 1 inch below the soil surface, no matter where that root was located in the original root ball or container. The backfill material, including container and root ball soil, shall be thoroughly watered on the same day that planting occurs regardless of season.
When installing plants, the Contractor shall dig planting holes three times the diameter of the container or root ball size. Any glazed surface of the planting hole shall be roughened prior to planting. 8-02.3(8)C
Pruning, Staking, Guying, and Wrapping

Plants shall be pruned at the time of planting only to remove minor broken or damaged twigs, branches or roots. Pruning shall be performed with a sharp tool and shall be done in such a manner as to retain or to encourage natural growth characteristics of the plants.
All other pruning shall be performed only after the plants have been in the ground at least
1 year and when plants are dormant.
Trees shall only be staked when so noted in the Plans. Each tree shall be staked or guyed before completion of the backfilling in accordance with the details shown in the Plans.
Commercial plant ties may be used in lieu of hose and wire guying upon concurrence of the Engineer. Trees shall be wrapped when so noted in the Plans. 8-02.3(9)
Seeding, Fertilizing, and Mulching
For all seed, the Contractor shall furnish the following documentation to the Engineer: 1.
The state or provincial seed dealer license and endorsements.
Page 8-26
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02 2.
Copies of Washington State Department of Agriculture (WSDA) test results on each lot of seed. Test results shall be within six months prior to the date of application. 3.
Within 30 calendar days of Execution of Contract, the Contractor shall provide written evidence to the Engineer that seed mix has been contracted or procured. 8-02.3(9)A
Dates for Application of Seed
Unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer, the Contractor shall apply seed for permanent erosion control during the following periods:
Western Washington1 (West of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
Eastern Washington (East of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
March 1 through May 15
September 1 through October 1
October 1 through November 15

1Seeding may be allowed outside these dates when allowed by the Engineer.
All roadway excavation and embankment ground surfaces that are completed to final grades shall be prepared and seeded during the first available seeding window. When environmental conditions are not conducive to satisfactory results, the Engineer may suspend the seeding Work until such time that the desired results are likely to be obtained. If seeding is suspended, temporary erosion control methods according to
Section 8-01 shall be used to protect the bare soil until seeding conditions improve. 8-02.3(9)B
Seeding and Fertilizing
The Contractor shall prepare the seeding area in accordance with Section 8-02.3(5)A and apply seed at the rate and mix specified in the Special Provisions. The Contractor shall notify the Engineer within 5 days in advance of any seeding operation and shall not begin the Work until areas prepared or designated for seeding have been accepted.
Following the Engineer’s acceptance, seeding of the accepted ground surfaces shall begin immediately.
Seeding shall not be done during windy weather or when the ground is frozen, or excessively wet.
When seeding by hand, the seed shall be incorporated into the top ¼ inch of soil by hand raking or other method that is allowed by the Engineer.
Seed applied as a separate operation using a hydroseeder shall have a tracer added to visibly aid uniform application. The tracer shall be HECP Short-Term Mulch applied at a rate of 200 to 250 pounds per acre and the tracer shall carry the measured specified seeding rate. 8-02.3(9)C
Seeding with Fertilizers and Mulches

When the Proposal includes any variation of seeding, fertilizing, and mulching, the seed and fertilizer shall be applied in one application followed by mulching. West of the Cascade Mountains, seed, fertilizer, and mulch may be completely applied in one application. East of the Cascades, seeding, fertilizing, and mulching shall not be applied as a single application unless allowed by the Engineer in writing prior to application. The fertilizing and mulching shall meet the requirements of Sections 8-02.3(6) and 8-02.3(11). 8-02.3(9)D
Inspection
Seeded areas will be inspected upon completion of seeding, fertilizing, and mulching. The
Work in any area will not be measured for payment until a uniform distribution of the materials is accomplished at the specified rate. Areas that have not received a uniform application of seed, fertilizer, and mulch at the specified rate, as determined by the
Engineer, shall be re-seeded, re-fertilized, or re-mulched prior to payment for seeding within a designated area.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-27 8-02
Roadside Restoration 8-02.3(9)E
Protection and Care of Seeded Areas

The Contractor shall install and establish a stable and weed free stand of grass as specified within all designated permanent seeding areas. A stable stand of grass shall meet the following requirements: 1.
A dense and uniform canopy cover, 70 percent for Western Washington and
50 percent for Eastern Washington, of specified species covers all seeded areas after
3 months of active growth following germination during the growing season. Canopy cover is defined as the cover of living and vigorous grass blades, leaves, and shoots of specified species. Volunteer species, weeds, woody plants, or other undesirable vegetation shall not factor into the canopy cover. Growth and establishment may require supplemental irrigation to meet cover requirements. 2.
Stand health is evident by vigorously growing planted species having a uniform rich-green appearance and with no dead patches or major gaps of growth. A stand of grass that displays rusting, wilting, stunted growth, disease, yellowing or browning of leaves, or bare patches does not meet the stand health requirement. 3.
The Contractor shall establish a stable stand of grass free of all weeds, non-specified grasses, and other undesirable vegetation. Weed control shall be in accordance with the Weed and Pest Control Plan and occur on a monthly basis during the establishment period and through the life of the Contract. 4.
Remove all trash, rocks, construction debris, and other obstructions that may be detrimental to the continued establishment of future seeding.
In addition to the requirements of Section 1-07.13, restoration of eroded areas including clean up, removal, and proper disposal of eroded material, filling and raking of eroded areas with Topsoil Type A or fine compost, and re-application of the specified seed, fertilizer, and mulch shall occur at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency. 8-02.3(10)
Lawn Installation 8-02.3(10)A
Dates and Conditions for Lawn Installation

In irrigated areas, lawn installation shall not begin until the irrigation system is fully operational.
Unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer, seeded lawn installation shall be performed during the following time periods at the location shown:
Western Washington (West of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
Eastern Washington (East of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
March 1 through May 15
September 1 through October 1
October 1 through November 15
When irrigation system is operational
March 1 through October 1
March 1 through November 1

8-02.3(10)B
Lawn Seeding and Sodding
The Contractor shall prepare the lawn area in accordance with Section 8-02.3(5) and apply seed at the mix and rate of application as specified in the Special Provisions.
The Contractor shall have the option of sodding in lieu of seeding for lawn installation at no additional expense to the Contracting Agency. The available grass mixtures on the current market shall be submitted to the Engineer for selection and acceptance. Seeding in lieu of sodding will not be allowed.
Seed placed by hand shall be raked into the soil. Following raking, the seeded soil shall be rolled with a smooth 50-pound roller. Sod strips shall be placed within 48 hours of being cut. Placement shall be without voids and have the end joints staggered. Following placement, the sod shall be rolled with a smooth roller to establish contact with the soil.
Page 8-28
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02
Barriers shall be erected, with warning signs where necessary, to preclude pedestrian traffic access to the newly placed lawn during the establishment period. 8-02.3(10)C
Lawn Establishment

Lawn establishment shall consist of caring for all new lawn areas within the limits of the project.
The lawn establishment period shall begin immediately after the lawn seeding or sodding has been accepted by the Engineer and shall extend to the end of four mowings or
20 working days whichever is longer. The mowings shall be done in accordance with
Section 8-02.3(10)D.
During the lawn establishment period, the Contractor shall ensure the continuing healthy growth of the turf. This care shall include keeping the project in a presentable condition including, but not limited to, removal of litter, mowing, trimming, removal of grass clippings, edging, fertilization, insecticide and fungicide applications, weed control, watering, repairing the irrigation system, and repair and reseeding all damaged areas.
Temporary barriers shall be removed only when directed by the Engineer.
All Work performed under lawn establishment shall comply with established turf management practices.
Acceptance of lawn planting as specified will be based on a uniform stand of grass and a uniform grade at the time of final inspection. The Contractor shall recultivate, re-grade, reseed, and refertilize areas that are bare or have a poor stand of grass or not having a uniform grade through any cause before final inspection at no additional cost to the
Contracting Agency. 8-02.3(10)D
Lawn Mowing

Lawn mowing shall begin immediately after the lawn establishment period has been accepted by the Engineer and shall extend to the end of the Contract or the first-year plant establishment, whichever is last.
The Contractor shall accomplish the following minimum requirements: 1.
Mow, trim, and edge as often as conditions dictate, at a minimum, once per week between April and September. Maximum height of lawn shall not exceed 3 inches.
The cutting height shall be 2 inches. Cuttings, trimmings, and edgings shall be disposed of off the project site. When the Engineer allows the use of a mulching mower, trimmings may be left in place. 2.
Water as often as conditions dictate depending on weather and soil conditions. 3.
Provide fertilizer, weed control, water, and other measures as necessary to establish and maintain a healthy stand of grass. 8-02.3(11)
Mulch
Mulches associated with seeding and planting shall be of the type specified in the Special
Provisions or as indicated in the Plans. The Contractor shall evenly apply mulch at the rates indicated in the Plans. Mulches shall not be placed below the anticipated water level of ditch slopes, pond bank slopes, and stream banks, or in areas of standing or flowing water. 8-02.3(11)A
Mulch for Seeding Areas

The Contractor shall furnish and evenly apply Hydraulically Applied Erosion Control
Product (HECP) Long Term Mulch at the rates indicated and in accordance with the
Manufacturer’s specifications unless otherwise specified.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-29 8-02
Roadside Restoration
HECP Long Term Mulch shall be hydraulically applied at the rate of 3500 pounds per acre with no more than 2000 pounds applied in any single lift. HECP mulch shall not be used within the Ordinary High Water Mark.
Mulch sprayed on signs or sign Structures shall be removed the same day.
Areas not accessible by mulching equipment shall be mulched by accepted hand methods.
HECP Long Term Mulch may be applied with seed and fertilizer west of the summit of the Cascade Range. East of the summit of the Cascade Range, seed and fertilizer shall be applied in a single application followed by the application of mulch. 8-02.3(11)B

Bark or Woodchip Mulch
The Contractor shall apply bark or wood chip mulch of the type and depth specified where shown in the Plans or as specified in the Special Provisions.
The Contractor shall complete final grading and placement/incorporation of soil amendments within the planting area prior to placement of mulch. Areas receiving bark mulch shall be bare soil or vegetation free before application, except where trees and other plants are specifically identified in the Plans or designated by the Engineer to be saved and protected.
Bark or wood chip mulch shall be placed to a uniform non-compacted depth of 3 inches over all planting areas unless otherwise specified. Mulch shall be feathered to the base of the plant and 1 inch below the top of junction and valve boxes, curbs, and pavement edges.
Any contamination of the mulch due to the Contractor’s operations shall be corrected to its former condition at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency. Mulch placed to a thickness greater than specified shall be at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency.
The Contractor shall keep plant material crowns, runners, and branches free of mulch at all times. 8-02.3(11)C
Bark or Woodchip Mulch Rings
The Contractor shall apply mulch rings around plants installed within existing vegetation areas or within seeded areas as shown in the Plans. Bark or wood chip mulch rings shall be applied to the surface of vegetation free amended soil in the isolated plant locations where shown in the Plans or as specified in the Special Provisions. Bark or wood chip mulch shall be placed to a uniform non-compacted depth of 3 inches to a radius of 2 feet around all plants within interplanted plant locations. 8-02.3(12)
Inspection and Completion of Initial Planting
Upon completion of the initial planting within a designated area, the Engineer will make an inspection of all planting areas. The Contractor shall be present at the inspection of planting areas. The Engineer will notify the Contractor, in writing, of any replacements or corrective action necessary to meet the plant installation requirements. The Contractor shall replace all materials rejected or missing and correct unsatisfactory conditions.
Completion of the initial planting within a designated area includes the following conditions: 1.

100 percent of each of the plant material categories are installed as shown in the Plans. 2.
Planting Area is cleaned up. 3.
Repairs are completed, including but not limited to, full operation of the irrigation system. 4.
Mulch coverage is complete. 5.
All weeds are controlled.
Page 8-30
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02.3(13) 8-02
Plant Establishment
Plant establishment consists of caring for all plants and planting areas within the project limits. The provisions of Sections 1-07.13(2) and 1-07.13(3) do not apply to this section.
When the Proposal includes the bid item PSIPE____ (Plant Selection Including Plant
Establishment), that bid item includes one year of plant establishment Work. The first year of plant establishment shall begin immediately upon written notification from the Engineer of the completion of initial planting for the project. The first-year plant establishment period shall be a minimum 12 month period. The first-year plant establishment shall be extended an amount equal to any periods where the Contractor does not comply with the plant establishment requirements and plan.
During the first-year plant establishment period, the Contractor shall perform all Work necessary to ensure the resumption and continued growth of the transplanted material.
This Work shall include, but is not limited to, applying water, removing foreign, dead, or rejected plant material, maintaining all planting areas in a weed-free condition, and replacing all unsatisfactory plant material planted under the Contract. If plants are stolen or damaged by the acts of others, the Contracting Agency will pay invoice cost only for the replacement plants with no mark-up and the Contractor will be responsible for the labor to install the replacement plants. Other weed control within the project limits but outside of planting, lawn, or seeding areas shall be as specified in Section 8-02.3(3).
During the first year of plant establishment, the Contractor shall meet monthly or at an agreed upon schedule with the Engineer for the purpose of joint inspection of the planting material. The Contractor shall correct all unsatisfactory conditions identified by the Engineer within a 10-day period immediately following the inspection. If plant replacement is required, the Contractor shall, within the 10 day period, submit a plan and schedule for the plant procurement and replacement to occur during the planting period as designated in Section 8-02.3(8). At the end of the plant establishment period, plants that do not show normal growth shall be replaced and all staking and guying that remain on the project shall be removed unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer.
All automatic irrigation systems shall be operated fully automatic during the plant establishment period and until final acceptance of the Contract. Payment for water used to water in plants, or hand watering of plant material or lawn areas unless otherwise specified, is the responsibility of the Contractor during the first-year plant establishment period.
Subsequent year plant establishment periods shall begin immediately at the completion of the preceding year’s plant establishment period. Each subsequent plant establishment period shall be one full calendar year in duration.
During the plant establishment period(s) after the first-year plant establishment, the Work necessary for the continued healthy and vigorous growth of all plants material shall be performed as directed by the Engineer.
Payment for water used to water plants during the subsequent year(s) of plant establishment will be paid under the plant establishment item. 8-02.3(14)

Plant Replacement
The Contractor shall be responsible for growing or arrange to provide sufficient plants for replacement of all plant material rejected through first-year plant establishment. All replacement plant material shall be inspected and accepted by the Engineer prior to installation. All rejected plant material shall be replaced with acceptable plants meeting the specifications and installed according to the requirements of this section at dates allowed by the Engineer.
All replacement plants shall be of the same species as the plants they replace and meet the requirements of Section 9-14.8 unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer. Plants
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-31 8-02
Roadside Restoration may vary in size reflecting one full season of growth should the Contractor elect to hold plant material under nursery conditions for an additional year to serve as replacement plants. Replacement plant material larger than specified in the Plans shall meet the applicable section requirements of the ASNS for container class, ball size, spread, and branching characteristics. 8-02.3(15)
Bioengineering
Bioengineering consists of using plant materials for the purpose of streambank or earthen slope construction and surface stabilization. This Work may include installing woody plant cuttings in various forms as well as part of streambank or earthen slope construction. 8-02.3(15)A
Live Fascines

Live fascines shall be constructed of live and dead cuttings bundled together with a diameter of 8 to 18 inches. Live cuttings shall be the species shown in the Plans. Dead branches may be cuttings from any woody, non-invasive plant native to the project area.
Dead branches may be placed within the live fascine and on the side exposed to the air.
Live branches shall be placed in contact with the soil along their entire length. Each live fascine must contain a minimum of eight live branches. Dead branches shall constitute no more than 40 percent of the total fascine content.
The total length of each live fascine shall be a minimum of 5 feet. Branches shall be bundled into log-like forms and bound with biodegradable twine spaced at 1 foot intervals along the entire length of the live fascine. Live fascines shall be installed horizontally in a trench whose depth shall be ½ the diameter of the live fascine. Secure the live fascine with live stakes 3 feet in length and ¾ inch in diameter placed at 18 inch intervals. A minimum of 3 live stakes shall be used per fascine. The live stakes shall be driven through the live fascine vertically into the slope. The ends of live fascines shall be woven together so that no gap remains between the two sections of the live fascine.
Prior to being covered with soil, the fascine shall be thoroughly watered. Once the fascine is covered with 6 inches of soil, the soil covering the fascine shall be thoroughly watered.
When used to remedy erosion areas, live fascines shall extend a minimum of 2 feet beyond the visible area of erosion and soil disturbance. The locations for live fascines and live stake rows shall be identified in the field for review and acceptance by the Engineer.
The Engineer may require adjustment of fascine locations prior to installation in order to best accomplish the intended functions.
Plant replacement during plant establishment for “PSIPE Live Fascine” will be required for any section void of live shoots for a length of 3 feet or more. Replacement shall consist of installing live stakes, spaced 1 foot apart above the fascine within the area void of live shoots. Live stakes shall be of the same species as the live fascine and shall have a minimum length of 3 feet and a minimum diameter of ¾ inch. The requirements of
Section 8-02.3(8) apply to PSIPE Live Fascine. 8-02.3(15)B
Brush Mattress

Live brush mattress shall be constructed of live branch cuttings, live poles, jute rope and topsoil. The live cuttings and live poles shall be from the plant species designated in the
Plans. Live branch cuttings shall be placed with the cut ends oriented down slope as shown in the Plans. Cuttings shall overlap from side to side and from top to bottom as each layer is constructed. The live branches in each succeeding upper layer shall overlap the adjacent lower layer by a minimum of 6 inches. A maximum of 20 percent of the branches may be dead branches, but the live branches shall be distributed evenly to provide even rooting and growth over the entire area of the brush mattress.
The Contractor shall anchor the live brush mattress to the slope using stakes and jute rope as shown in the Plans. Initially, the stakes shall be installed to protrude above the live brush mattress. The Contractor shall attach the jute rope to the stakes and tighten
Page 8-32
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Roadside Restoration 8-02 the rope by tamping the stakes further into the bank, pulling the live brush mattress tight against the soil surface. The Contractor shall cover the live brush mattress with sufficient stockpiled topsoil to ensure good soil contact with the live plant material.
Plant replacement during plant establishment for “PSIPE Live Brush Mattress” will be required for any section void of live shoots for an area of 25 square feet or more.
Replacement shall consist of installing live stakes, spaced 3 feet apart in a triangular pattern within the area void of live shoots. Live stakes shall be of the same species as the live brush mattress and shall have a minimum length of 3 feet and a minimum diameter of ¾ inch. The requirements of Section 8-02.3(8) apply to PSIPE Brush Mattress. 8-02.3(15)C
Brush Layer
Brush layers shall be constructed of live branch cuttings, randomly mixed, from the plant species listed under the brush layer heading in the Plans. The number of branches required will vary depending on the average branch diameter and layer thickness.
Brush layers shall be placed in a trench dug at a 45-degree incline into the slope or stream bank. Two-thirds to three-fourths of the length of the live branches shall be buried. Soil shall be firmly tamped in place. Succeeding layers shall be spaced as detailed in the Plans.
Brush layer placed in stream banks shall be angled downstream.
Brush layers may include plant establishment when designated as PSIPE Brush Layer.
Plant replacement for PSIPE Brush Layer will be required for each section void of live shoots for a continuous distance of 3 feet or more. The requirements of Section 8-02.3(8) apply to PSIPE Brush Layer. 8-02.3(16)

Roadside Maintenance Under Construction
When the Contract includes the item, Roadside Maintenance Under Construction, this
Work includes roadside mowing and ditch maintenance, and noxious weed control outside of planting areas according to Section 8-02.3(3). 8-02.3(16)A
Roadside Mowing
The Contractor shall mow designated roadside grass areas to the limits designated by the
Engineer. Roadside mowing is limited to slopes not steeper than 3(H) to 1(V).
The Contractor shall mow according to the following requirements: 1.
Trim around traffic equipment, structures, planting areas, or other features extending above ground preceding or simultaneously with each mowing. 2.
Maintain grass between 4 and 12 inches in height. 3.
Operate mowing equipment with suitable guards to prevent throwing rocks or debris onto the traveled way or off of the Contracting Agency property. Power driven equipment shall not cause ruts, deformation, and compaction of the vegetated soil.

4.
Removing clippings is required on the traveled way, shoulders, walkways, or
Structures. 5.
Restore soil rutting to a smooth and even grade at the direction of the Engineer. 8-02.3(16)B
Ditch Maintenance
The Contractor shall maintain drainage for the duration of the Contract according to the following requirements: 1.
Maintain flow lines in drainage channels and roadside ditches. 2.
Cutting or trimming vegetation within drainage channels to maintain positive flow. 3.
Remove dirt and debris from inside of culverts or any drainage area where runoff has allowed accumulations and re-seed for erosion control.
Restore channels to previous operational condition.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-33 8-02 8-02.4
Roadside Restoration
Measurement
Topsoil, bark or woodchip mulch and soil amendments will be measured by the acre or the square yard along the grade and slope of the area covered immediately after placement.
Bark or woodchip mulch rings will be measured per each.
Compost will be measured by the acre or the square yard along the grade and slope of the area covered immediately after application.
Seeding, fertilizing, and mulching will be measured by the acre or the square yard by ground slope measurement or through the use of design data.
Seeding and fertilizing by hand will be measured by the square yard. No adjustment in area size will be made for the vegetation free zone around each plant.
Seeded lawn, sod installation, and lawn mowing will be measured along the ground slope and computed in square yards of actual lawn completed, established, and accepted.
Plant selection will be measured per each.
PSIPE __ (Plant Selection Including Plant Establishment) will be measured per each.
Live pole will be measured per each.
Live stake row will be measured by the linear foot along the ground slope line.
The pay quantities for plant materials will be determined by count of the number of satisfactory plants in each category accepted by the Engineer.
Fascine and PSIPE live fascine will be measured by the linear foot along the ground slope line.
Brush mattress and PSIPE live brush mattress will be measured by the surface square yard along the ground slope line.
Brush layer and PSIPE brush layer will be measured by the linear foot along the ground slope line.
Water will be measured in accordance with Section 2-07.4. Measurement will be made of only that water hauled in tank trucks or similar equipment. 8-02.5

Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following listed Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Project Area Weed and Pest Control” will be paid in accordance with Section 1-09.6.
For the purpose of providing a common Proposal for all Bidders, the Contracting
Agency entered an amount for “Project Area Weed and Pest Control” in the Proposal to become a part of the total Bid by the Contractor. Payment under this item will be made only when the Work is not already covered by other items. “Topsoil Type ____”, per acre or per square yard.
The unit Contract price for “Topsoil Type ____” shall be full payment for all costs including weed control pre-treatment of topsoil areas, excavation, and stockpiling for the specified Work. “Fine Compost ”, per acre or per square yard. “Medium Compost”, per acre or per square yard. “Coarse Compost”, per acre or per square yard.
The unit Contract price for “Fine Compost”, “Medium Compost” or “Coarse Compost” shall be full pay for furnishing and spreading the compost onto the existing soil.
Page 8-34
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Roadside Restoration 8-02 “Soil Amendment”, per acre or per square yard.
The unit Contract price for “Soil Amendment” shall be full pay for furnishing and incorporating the soil amendment into the existing soil. “Plant Selection ___”, per each.
The unit Contract price for “Plant Selection ___”, per each shall be full pay for all Work to perform the work as specified within the planting area prior to planting for weed control, planting area preparation and installation of plants with initial watering.
As the plants that do not include plant establishment are obtained, propagated, and grown, partial payments will be made as follows:
Payment of 15 percent of the unit Contract price per each when the plant materials have been contracted, propagated, and are growing under nursery conditions. The
Contractor shall provide the Engineer with certification that the plant material has been procured or contracted for delivery to the project for planting within the time limits of the project. The certification shall state the location, quantity, and size of all material.
Payment will be increased to 100 percent of the unit Contract price per each for contracted plant material at the completion of the initial planting.
All partial payments shall be limited to the actual number of healthy vigorous plants that meet the stage requirements, limited to plan quantity. Previous partial payments made for materials rejected or missing will be deducted from future payments due the Contractor. “PSIPE ___”, per each.
The unit Contract price for “PSIPE ___”, per each, shall be full pay for all Work to perform as specified within the planting area for weed control and planting area preparation, planting, staking, cleanup, and water necessary to complete planting operations as specified to the end of first year plant establishment.
As the plants that include plant establishment are obtained, propagated, and grown, partial payments will be made as follows after inspection by the Engineer:
Payment of 5 percent of the unit Contract price, per each, when the plant materials have been contracted, propagated, and are growing under nursery conditions. The
Contractor shall provide the Engineer with certification that the plant material has been procured or contracted for delivery to the project for planting within the time limits of the project. The certification shall state the location, quantity, and size of all material.
Payment will be increased to 15 percent of the unit Contract price, per each, upon completion of the initial weed control and planting area preparation Work.
Payment will be increased to 60 percent of the unit Contract price per each for the contracted plant material in a designated unit area when planted.
Payment will be increased to 70 percent of the unit Contract price per each for contracted plant material at the completion of the initial planting.
Payment will be increased to the appropriate percentage upon reaching the following plant establishment milestones:
June 30th						80 percent
September 30th					90 percent
Completion of first-year plant establishment or after all replacement plants have been installed, whichever is later

100 percent
Plant establishment milestones are achieved when planting areas meet conditions described in Section 8-02.3(13).
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-35 8-02
Roadside Restoration “Seeding, Fertilizing and Mulching”, per acre or per square yard. “Seeding and Fertilizing”, per acre or per square yard. “Seeding and Fertilizing by Hand”, per square yard. “Second Application of Fertilizer”, per acre. “Seeding and Mulching”, per acre. “Seeded Lawn Installation”, per square yard. “Sod Installation”, per square yard. “Lawn Mowing”, per square yard.
The unit Contract price per square yard for “Seeded Lawn Installation” or “Sod
Installation” shall be full pay for all costs necessary to prepare the area, plant or sod the lawn, erect barriers, control weeds, and establish lawn areas and for furnishing all labor, tools, equipment, and materials necessary to complete the Work as specified and shall be paid in the following sequence for healthy, vigorous lawn:
Completion of Lawn Planting		
60 percent of individual areas

Mid Lawn Establishment (after 2 mowings)
85 percent of individual areas
Completion of Lawn Establishment (after 4 mowings)
100 percent of individual areas “Plant Establishment Year ____” will be paid in accordance with Section 1-09.6.
For the purpose of providing a common Proposal for all Bidders, the Contracting
Agency entered an amount for “Plant Establishment - ___ Year” in the Proposal to become a part of the total Bid by the Contractor. “Live Pole”, per each. “Live Stake Row”, per linear foot. “Bark or Wood Chip Mulch”, per acre or per square yard.
The unit Contract price for “Bark or Wood Chip Mulch” shall be full pay for furnishing and spreading the mulch onto the existing soil. “Bark or Wood Chip Mulch Rings”, per each.
The unit Contract price “Bark or Wood Chip Mulch Rings” shall be full pay for furnishing and spreading the mulch onto the existing soil. “Fascine” and “PSIPE Live Fascine”, per linear foot. “Brush Mattress” and “PSIPE Live Brush Mattress”, per square yard. “Brush Layer” and “PSIPE Brush Layer”, per linear foot.
When PSIPE is included with Fascine, Brush Mattress, or Brush Layer, the payment schedule for PSIPE ____ will apply. “Roadside Maintenance under Construction” will be paid in accordance with
Section 1-09.6.
Agency has entered an amount for “Roadside Maintenance Under Construction” in the
Proposal to become a part of the total Bid by the Contractor. “Water”, per M Gal.

Page 8-36
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Irrigation Systems 8-03
Irrigation Systems 8-03.1
Description 8-03
This Work consists of installing irrigation systems in accordance with these Specifications and the details shown in the Plans or as approved by the Engineer. 8-03.1(1)
Definitions
Catch Can Test – A test utilizing containers spaced at regular intervals for collecting water for use in a water audit.
Critical Root Zone – The International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) defines CRZ as an area equal to 1 foot radius from the base of the tree’s trunk for each 1 inch of the tree’s diameter at 4.5 feet above grade (referred to as diameter at breast height).
Drip Irrigation – A system of irrigation involving the controlled delivery of water directly to individual plants through a network of tubes or pipes and emitters.
Emitters – Low volume emission devices including but not limited to pressure compensating emitters, self-flushing emitters, non-flow restricting barbed couplers or in-line drip emitter tubing.
Flushing – A cleansing by causing large quantities of water to pass through the pipe or conduit.
Hydrostatic Pressure Testing – A test used to determine the integrity of the pipeline after installation before it’s placed into service.
Irrigation Audit – Procedure to collect and present information concerning the uniformity of application, precipitation rate, and general condition of an irrigation system and its components.
Irrigation Head – Nozzle or device, which may or may not rotate for distributing water under pressure through the air including but not limited to impact drive, rotor, or spray head.
Irrigation Sleeve – Casing, pipe or conduit that is installed under hardscapes or structures for the purpose of running irrigation piping or wiring.
Lateral Lines – All supply pipe and fittings between the irrigation control valves and the connections to the irrigation heads. Swing joints, thick-walled PVC or polyethylene (poly) pipe, flexible risers, rigid pipe risers, and associated fittings are not considered part of the lateral line but incidental components of the sprinkler heads.
Main Lines – All supply pipe and fittings between the water meter and the irrigation control valves.
Sprinkler Irrigation System – Type of irrigation using mechanical devices with above ground or pop-up irrigation heads to distribute by converting water to a high velocity discharge stream or streams. 8-03.1(2)

Regulations and Code
Cross-Connections – WAC 246-290-490
Section 8-20.1(1), Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical – Regulation and Code
Section 8-20.1(2), Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical – Industry Codes and Standards
Waterworks Operator Certification – WAC 246-292
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-37 8-03
Irrigation Systems 8-03.2
Materials

Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Sand
Crushed Surfacing
Gravel Backfill for Dry Wells
Irrigation Materials
Electrical Wire and Splices
Detectable Warning Tape
Electrical Systems
Steel Casing 8-03.3
Construction Requirements

8-03.3(1)
General Requirements 9-03.2(1) 9-03.9(3) 9-03.12(5) 9-15 9-15.17 9-15.18 9-29 9-29.1(7)
Location of pipe, tubing, irrigation heads, emitters, valves, cross-connection devices, irrigation sleeves and other equipment shall be as shown in the Plans and shall be of the size and type indicated.
Potable water supplies shall be protected against cross-connections in accordance with applicable regulations for the Washington State Department of Health and the local health authority.
Construction of irrigation electrical systems shall conform to applicable portions of
Sections 8-20. 8-03.3(2)
Submittals
When required, the Contractor shall submit the following: 1.
Staging Plan – A Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of a material staging plan, should the Contractor propose Contracting Agency-owned property for staging areas. 2.
Cable Vault Installation Plan – A Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of a cable vault installation plan showing the exact proposed installation location by roadway station, offset and the scheduled sequence for each cable vault installation.

3.
Pit Plan – A Type 2 or 2E Working Drawing consisting of a pit plan, for each boring or jacking pit, depicting the protection of traffic and pedestrians, pit dimensions, shoring, bracing, struts, walers, sheet piles, conduit skids, and means of attachment, casing type, and casing size. A Type 2E Working Drawing is only required where shoring, bracing, struts, walers, sheet piles, or casing are used. 4.
Boring, Jacking, or Directional Drilling Plan – A Type 2 or 2E Working Drawing consisting of a boring, jacking directional drilling plan depicting the boring, jacking, or directional drilling system and entire support system. A Type 2E Working Drawing is only required if a support system is used. 5.
Construction lock-out/tag-out procedures – A Type 1 Working drawing detailing construction lock-out/tag out procedures. 6.
Maintenance and Operations Manual – A Type 1 working drawings transmitting the
Maintenance and Operation Manual in accordance with Section 8-03.3(13)B. 7.
Irrigation Audit Report – A Type 1 working drawings transmitting the Irrigation Audit
Report in accordance with Section 8-03.3(12).
Page 8-38
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Irrigation Systems 8-03.3(3) 8-03
Layout of Irrigation System
The irrigation system shall be installed within planting areas unless otherwise indicated in the Plans. Prior to installation, the Contractor shall stake the irrigation system following the schematic design shown in the Plans for approval by the Engineer. Minor alterations and changes in the layout may be allowed in order to conform to ground conditions and to obtain full and adequate coverage of plant material. However, no changes in the system as planned shall be made without prior authorization by the Engineer. 8-03.3(3)A
Locating Irrigation Sleeves
All buried pipe under structures, vehicular and pedestrian surfaces and as indicated in the Plans shall be protected by irrigation sleeving. Irrigation sleeves placed during general construction prior to installation of the irrigation system shall be marked at both ends with a 2 by 4 wood stake extending a minimum of 6 inches above finish grade and painted blue on the exposed end. At any point during construction, the stake shall be embedded 24-inches. Irrigation sleeving shall extend a minimum 2 feet beyond the limits of pavement, curb, or pedestrian surface.
Existing underground irrigation sleeve ends shall be located by potholing. 8-03.3(4)
Irrigation Water Service
All water meter(s) shall be installed by the serving utility.
It shall be the Contractor’s responsibility to: 1.
Contact the Engineer to schedule the water meter(s) installation;

2.
Provide a minimum of 60 calendar days’ notice to the Engineer for the Contracting
Agency to arrange installation of the water meter(s) by the serving utility; and 3.
Connect the irrigation system to the water meter.
Construction activities for irrigation water service connections shall be in accordance with the serving utility’s Service Agreement. A copy of the Service Agreement can be obtained from the Engineer.
The Contracting Agency will be responsible for all costs for the installation of the water meter(s) by the serving utility and water consumption needed for irrigation system installation including initial flushing and testing. Costs for water consumption after initial testing of the system will be the responsibility of the Contractor through
Physical Completion. 8-03.3(5)
Irrigation Electrical Service
All electrical service(s) shall be installed by the serving utility.
It shall be the Contractor’s responsibility to: 1.

Contact the Engineer to schedule the electrical service(s) installation; 2.
Provide a minimum of 60 calendar days’ notice to the Engineer for the Contracting
Agency to arrange installation of the electrical service(s) by the serving utility; and 3.
Splice and run conduit and wire from the electrical service connection(s) or service cabinet to the automatic electrical controller and connect the conductors to the circuit(s) in accordance with the controller manufacturer’s diagrams or recommendations.
The installation of conduits and wire for the electrical power service shall be in accordance with the serving utility’s Service Agreement and Section 8-20. A copy of the
Service Agreement may be obtained from the Engineer.
The Contracting Agency will be responsible for all costs for the installation of the electrical service(s) by the serving utility. Costs for consumption of energy shall be in accordance with Section 8-20.3(10).
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-39

8-03
Irrigation Systems 8-03.3(6)
Excavation 8-03.3(6)A
Trenches 8-03.3(6)A1
General
Pipe trenches shall be no wider at any point than is necessary to lay the pipe or install equipment. Trench bottoms shall be relatively smooth and consist of sand or other suitable material free from rocks, stones, or any material that might damage the pipe.
Trenches through rock or other material unsuitable for trench bottoms and sides shall be excavated 6-inches below the required depth and shall be backfilled in accordance with
Section 8-03.3(11). 8-03.3(6)A2
Within Critical Root Zone
Mechanical trenching within the Critical Root Zone of existing trees shall not be allowed. 8-03.3(6)A3

Detectable Marking Tape
Detectable marking tape shall be placed in all trenches 6 inches directly above, parallel to, and along the entire length of all nonmetallic water pipes, sleeving, wiring, conduits, and casing pipes. Detectable marking tape shall meet the requirements of Section 9-15.18. 8-03.3(6)B
Trenchless Construction
All jacking, directional drilling or boring operations shall be performed in accordance with an approved plan as indicated in Section 8-03.3(2). Construction shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 8-20.3(5)E3, Section 8-20.3(5)E4 and
Section 8-20.3(5)E5. 8-03.3(7)
Piping 8-03.3(7)A
Irrigation Piping
All irrigation pipe shall be a minimum of 18 inches below finished grade measured from the top of the pipe or as shown in the Plans. Where possible, mains and laterals shall be placed in the same trench. All lines shall be placed a minimum of 3 feet from the edge of concrete sidewalks, curbs, guardrails, walls, fences, and traffic barriers. Pipe pulling will not be allowed for installation and placement of irrigation pipe.
Pipe trenches shall not be backfilled until hydrostatic pressure testing is completed and accepted by the Engineer.
All plastic materials shall be protected from direct sunlight in accordance with
Section 1-06.4. 8-03.3(7)B

Irrigation Sleeves
Irrigation sleeving shall be Schedule 80 PVC unless otherwise indicated in the Plans. The minimum diameter of the sleeve shall be twice as large as the proposed piping size being buried. When the plans indicate a sleeve larger than twice the diameter, the larger sleeve shall be installed. Irrigation wiring shall be sleeved in separate sleeving or conduit unless indicated otherwise in the Plans.
Irrigation sleeving installed under existing pavement shall use steel casing in lieu of
Schedule 80 PVC sleeves and shall be installed in accordance with Section 8-20.3(5)E3,
Section 8-20.3(5)E4 or Section 8-20.3(5)E5.
Page 8-40
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Irrigation Systems 8-03.3(8) 8-03
Jointing
During construction, pipe ends shall be capped to prevent entry of foreign objects. 8-03.3(8)A

Joining Similar Materials
All galvanized steel pipe shall have sound, clean cut, standard pipe threads well fitted.
All pipes shall be reamed to the full diameter and burrs removed before assembly.
Threaded galvanized steel joints shall be constructed using either a nonhardening, nonseizing multipurpose sealant, PTFE pipe thread tape or paste as recommended by the pipe manufacturer or as shown in the Plans. Threaded galvanized steel joints shall be constructed using either a nonhardening, non-seizing multipurpose sealant, PTFE pipe thread tape or paste as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. All threaded joints shall be made tight with wrenches without the use of handle extensions. Joints that leak shall be cleaned and remade with new material. Caulking or thread cement to make joints tight shall not be permitted.
PVC pipe, couplings, and fittings shall be handled and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation. PVC pipe ends shall be cut 90 degrees to their longitudinal axis, cleaned of all cutting burrs and free of dirt prior to solvent welding.
Pipe and fittings shall be joined by solvent welding utilizing a two-step solvent/cement process according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. Solvents used must penetrate the surface at both pipe and fitting, which shall result in complete fusion at the joint.
Use solvent and cement as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. Before hydrostatic pressure testing the system, all solvent welded joints shall be fully cured following the solvent weld manufacturer’s recommendation.
Threaded PVC joints shall be assembled using PTFE pipe thread tape as recommended by the pipe manufacturer.
Polyethylene pipe, tubing and associated fittings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The ends of the polyethylene pipe shall be cut square, reamed smooth inside and out, and inserted to the full depth of the fitting. Clamps for insert fittings shall be stainless steel and have a tightening mechanism. 8-03.3(8)B
Joining Dissimilar Materials

On PVC or polyethylene-to-metal connections, complete the metal connection first. Use a nonhardening compound on threaded connections. Connections between metal and PVC or polyethylene are to be threaded using female threaded PVC adapters with threaded
Schedule 80 PVC nipples only. 8-03.3(9)
Irrigation System Installation 8-03.3(9)A
General
The Contractor shall coordinate new irrigation water service connections with the serving utility. The Contractor shall follow the serving utilities’ standards for connections from meter through cross-connection control device. Cross-connections devices and enclosures shall be installed according to the Plans. 8-03.3(9)B
Irrigation Heads
Unless otherwise indicated in the Plans, final position of irrigation heads shall be flush with the finished grade in grass or mulch areas as measured from the top of the irrigation head. All irrigation heads adjacent to walks, curbs, and pavement shall be placed as shown in the Plans. Polyethylene (poly) pipe for connections to irrigation heads shall be with fittings recommended by the manufacturer of the poly pipe to produce a flexible swing joint assembly between the lateral line and the irrigation head. The length of thick-walled poly pipe at each flexible swing joint assembly shall be 18 inches minimum to 36 inches maximum. Risers shall be sized as shown in the Plans.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-41

8-03 8-03.3(9)C
Irrigation Systems
Valve, Valve Boxes, Hose Bibs
All automatic control valves, quick coupler valves, hose bibs, flow control valves, ball valves and pressure reducing valves shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations unless otherwise indicated in the Plans. Valve boxes shall have a minimum 3 inches and maximum 18 inches of clearance on sides and lid. There shall be one valve or irrigation component for each valve box unless approved by the Engineer.
The bottom of all valve boxes shall be set firmly on crushed surfacing base course.
Extensions designed for use with the valve box consistent with matching manufacturer shall be used to reach the required surface elevation. Install double-sided valve identification tags on each valve. Stamped tag number to match zone valve number on controller and in as-built drawings.
Final elevation of valve boxes and quick coupler valves shall be between ½ and 1 inch above finished grade or bark or wood chip mulch surface, or as shown in the Plans.
Quick coupler valves and hose bibs shall be installed in valve boxes, either separately or within a control valve assembly box upstream of the control valves. Valves, quick couplers, and hose bibs shall have 3 inches of clearance on all sides within the valve box. 8-03.3(9)D
Drip Irrigation
Drip irrigation tubing, emitter tubing and associated drip tubing fittings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and as shown on the Plans. Drip tubing shall be installed horizontal to the ground contours to make a parallel distribution pattern. Drip tubing shall be secured to the ground using commercially available wire stakes every 5 feet and at each fitting or change of direction unless otherwise shown in the Plans.
Drip tubing shall be free from kinks or damage. Single kinks shall be cut out and undamaged sections of drip tubing coupled using approved fittings. Drip tubing runs with multiple, regular kinks as determined by the Engineer shall be replaced. Install drain valves, when specified at the lowest point of each zone in a minimum 10 inch diameter round valve box over 2 cubic feet of gravel backfill for dry wells. 8-03.3(9)E

Controller
Locate automatic controller pedestals and container cabinets as shown in the Plans and in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Provide three galvanized metal or PVC electrical wire conduits through the base and 3 inches minimum beyond the edge or side of the base, both inside and outside of the pedestal. Conduits shall be sized to accommodate all wires according to Section 8-20. Conduit shall not be smaller than 1 inch diameter. 8-03.3(9)F
Cross-Connection Control Device Installation
Cross-connection control devices shall be installed and inspected, and then tested by a certified cross-connection control specialist or designee in accordance with applicable portions of WAC 246-290-490 and other applicable regulations as set forth by the
Washington State Department of Health and local authority.
Inspections and tests shall be conducted at the time of initial installation, after repairs, and annually each Spring prior to reactivation of the irrigation system. These inspections and tests shall be completed, and the results recorded by a licensed Backflow Assembly Tester (BAT). The inspection shall document that the devices are in good operating condition prior to flushing and testing of any downstream water lines. Devices that are defective shall be repaired or replaced and retested.
Page 8-42
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Irrigation Systems 8-03
Inspection and test results shall be recorded on the Backflow Prevention Assembly Test
Report (WSDOT Form 540-02) and other forms as may be required by the serving utility.
The completed forms shall be submitted to the appropriate health authority, the serving utility and the Engineer. 8-03.3(9)G

Electrical Wire Installation
All electrical work shall be performed in accordance with Section 8-20. Electrical wiring between the automatic controller and automatic valves shall be direct burial and may share a common neutral wire. Separate control conductors shall be run from the automatic controller to each valve. When more than one automatic controller is required, a separate common neutral wire shall be provided for each controller and the automatic valves it controls. Electrical wire shall be installed in the trench adjacent to or above the irrigation pipe, but no less than 12 inches deep. Plastic tape or nylon tie wraps shall be used to bundle wires together at 10 foot intervals. If it is necessary to run electrical wire in a separate trench from the irrigation pipe, the wire shall be placed at a minimum depth of 18 inches and “snaked” from side to side in the trench. Each circuit shall be identified at both ends and at all splices with a permanent marker identifying zone and/or station.
Wiring placed under pavement and walls, or through walls, shall be placed in an electrical conduit or within an irrigation sleeve. Electrical conduit shall not be less than 1 inch in diameter.
Splices will be permitted only in electrical junction boxes, valve boxes, pole bases, or within control equipment boxes or pedestals. A minimum of 18 inches of excess conductor shall be left at all splices, terminals, and control valves to facilitate inspection and future splicing. The excess wire shall be neatly coiled to fit easily into the boxes.
All 120-volt electrical conductors and conduit shall be installed by a licensed electrician, including all wire splices and wire terminations.
All wiring shall be tested in accordance with Section 8-20.3(11). Circuits below 115 volts nominal shall follow the procedure described for circuits below 115 volts nominal, with a minimum insulation resistance of not less than 2 megaohms to ground for 24-volt direct burial circuits. 8-03.3(10)
Flushing and Testing 8-03.3(10)A
General Testing Requirements
All gauges used in the testing of water pressures shall be certified as accurate by an independent testing laboratory immediately prior to use on the project, with documentation submitted to the Engineer for verification. Gauges shall be retested when required by the Engineer.
The automatic controller shall be tested for a period of two weeks under normal operating conditions. The Contractor shall make all necessary adjustments or corrections according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and retested until its operation is accepted by the
Engineer. 8-03.3(10)B

Mainline or Lateral Flushing
All main lines shall receive two fully open flushings to remove debris that may have entered the line during construction: the first before the placement of valves and the second after placement of valves and prior to hydrostatic pressure testing.
All lateral lines shall receive one fully open flushing prior to placement of irrigation heads, emitters, and drain valves. The flushing shall be of sufficient duration to remove all dirt or debris that has entered the lateral lines during construction.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-43 8-03 8-03.3(10)C
Irrigation Systems
Mainline or Lateral Hydrostatic Pressure Testing
All main lines shall be purged of air and tested with a minimum hydrostatic water pressure of 150 psi for 60 minutes without the introduction of additional service or pumping pressure. Testing shall be done with one pressure gauge installed on the line, in the location approved by the Engineer. For systems using a pump, an additional pressure gauge shall be installed at the pump. Lines that show leaks or loss of pressure exceeding
5 psi at the end of specified test periods will be rejected.
All lateral lines shall be purged of air and tested in place at operating line pressure with a pressure gauge and with all fittings capped or plugged. The operating line pressure shall be maintained for 30 minutes with valves closed and without the introduction of additional service or pumping pressure. Lines that show leaks or loss of pressure exceeding 5 psi at the end of specified test periods will be rejected. The Contractor shall correct and retest main and lateral line installations that have been rejected.
Throughout the life of the Contract, the Contractor shall repair, flush, and test all main and lateral lines that have sustained a break or disruption of service. Upon restoration of the water service, the affected lines shall be brought up to operating pressure. The
Contractor shall then conduct a thorough inspection of all irrigation heads, emitters, or other components located downstream of the break or disruption of service and make all needed repairs to ensure the entire irrigation system is operating properly. 8-03.3(10)D

Drip Line Testing
All Polyethylene Pipe and Drip Tubing shall be capped, purged of air, and tested in place at operating line pressure with a pressure gauge prior to the installation of all distribution tubing, drip emitters, or other emission devices. The operating line pressure shall be maintained for 30 minutes with valves closed and without the introduction of additional service or pumping pressure. Lines that show leaks in the pipe or fittings, or loss of pressure exceeding 5 psi at the end of specified test periods will be rejected. The
Contractor shall correct and retest Polyethylene Pipe or Drip Tubing installations that have been rejected. 8-03.3(11)
Backfill
Backfill shall not be allowed until all piping has been inspected, tested, and accepted in writing by the Engineer except where roots are encountered as described in Section 8-03.3(6)A2, after which backfilling shall be completed as soon as possible. All backfill material placed within 6 inches of the pipe shall be sand or other approved material free of rocks, roots, concrete, and construction debris that might cut or otherwise damage the pipe. Backfill shall not contain material one inch or greater in diameter. Backfill from the bottom of the trench to approximately 6 inches above the pipe shall be compacted in a manner that will not damage pipe or wiring and shall proceed evenly on both sides of the pipe. The remainder of the backfill shall be compacted, except that heavy equipment shall not be used within 18 inches of any pipe. Backfill shall be placed and compacted in layers not to exceed 12 inches. Backfill shall be compacted to a minimum of 85 percent of the maximum density and may be tested at the discretion of the Engineer. The top 6 inches of the backfill shall be of topsoil material or the first 6 inches of material removed in the excavation. 8-03.3(12)
Adjusting System
Before final inspection, the Contractor shall adjust and balance all irrigation heads or emitters to provide adequate and uniform coverage. Spray patterns shall be balanced by adjusting individual irrigation heads with the adjustment screws or replacing nozzles to produce a uniform pattern. Overspray onto impervious surfaces, signs or other structures will not be allowed.
Page 8-44
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Irrigation Systems 8-03
Irrigation Sprinkler Systems shall receive a landscape irrigation audit performed by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor (CLIA) in good standing with the Irrigation
Association (IA). The audit shall be conducted in accordance with the current edition of the IA’s Irrigation Auditor Guidelines. The audit report shall include the following information: 1.
A plan of the irrigation system that shows station numbers, station locations, irrigation head locations, nozzle size, distances between irrigation heads, and catch can test locations. 2.
Flow rates, static and dynamic system pressures, and catch can test results for each zone. 3.
Pressure readings, distribution uniformity, and precipitation rates for each zone.
All fixed spray systems shall have a minimum distribution uniformity of 55 percent for radial spray heads and 70 percent for rotors as documented by the audit through catch can test results. All zones not meeting these minimums shall be corrected by the
Contractor and retested until they meet these Specifications as documented in the audit report.
The results of the audit shall be submitted to the Engineer in a Type 1 Working Drawing prior to acceptance of the irrigation system. The Contractor shall use the results of the irrigation audit to set watering frequency and timing for each irrigation zone. 8-03.3(13)
As-Built Plans, M&O Manuals, and Operating Tools

8-03.3(13)A
As-Builts
The Contractor shall submit as-built Plans consisting of corrected shop drawings, schematic circuit diagrams, zoning chart, timing schedule and other details necessary to show the Work as constructed. Locations of all irrigation system(s) equipment including, but not limited to, water meters, cross-connection control devices, electrical services, pipe and wire runs, irrigation sleeves, splice boxes, controllers, valves, heads, emitters, and other equipment shall be clearly shown and labeled on the as-built Plans. All buried pipe and wires shall be labeled with layout dimensions locating trenches from visible site features (curb, edge of pavement, valve box, etc.). Grouping of pipe(s) and wire(s) shall be identified when located in the same trench. The as-built Plans shall include all notes pertaining to damage, repairs, and maintenance to the system during installation and operation through the end of the Plant Establishment period. In the event that repairs, or adjustment are made after the initial submittal of the as-built plans, the notes pertaining to those damage, repair or maintenance shall be submitted as a supplement.
These drawings shall be on sheets conforming in size to the provisions of Section 1-05.3.
All drawings must be complete and legible.
All corrections ordered by the Engineer shall be made by the Contractor prior to acceptance. 8-03.3(13)B
Maintenance & Operations Manuals
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with an electronic pdf and one copy of the system operations manual. The manual shall include a parts list, catalog cuts, equipment manuals, a summary of operations with startup/winterize techniques, controller programming, valve cleaning requirements, irrigation head or emitter adjustment instructions, backflow device catalog cut and other applicable instructions to ensure normal operation after Physical Completion.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-45 8-03
Irrigation Systems 8-03.3(13)C
Operating Tools
All locks or locking devices shall be keyed alike, and three sets of keys shall be provided to the Engineer prior to Physical Completion.
Three sets of keys shall be provided for all components requiring keys, including automatic controller valves, drain valves, and manual control valves. Three sets of specialty keys or manufacturer provided tools for operating components shall be provided.
When handles are included as an integral part of a three-way valve, the Contractor shall remove them and give them to the Engineer.
Laminated copies of the timing and valve schedule shall be placed in the controller boxes or in locations specified by the Engineer. 8-03.3(14)
System Operation 8-03.3(14)A
General
The irrigation system shall be completely installed, tested, and automatically operable prior to planting in a unit area except where otherwise specified in the Plans or approved by the Engineer. The Contractor shall be fully responsible for all maintenance, repair, testing, inspecting, and automatic operation of the entire system until all Work is considered complete as determined by the final inspection specified in Section 1-05.11.
This responsibility shall include, but not be limited to, draining the system prior to winter and reactivating the system in the spring and at other times as required by the Engineer.
The final inspection of the irrigation system will coincide with Physical Completion or the end of first-year plant establishment, whichever is later.
The Contractor shall be responsible for having annual inspections and tests performed on all cross-connection control devices as required the Washington State Department of
Health through Physical Completion. Inspections and tests shall be conducted at the time of initial activation and each spring prior to reactivating the irrigation system. Potable water shall not flow through the cross-connection control device to any downstream component until tested and approved for use by the local health authority in accordance with Section 8-03.3(9)F.
The irrigation system shall be deactivated and drained for winterization. Storage of components during the winterized period shall be the responsibility of the Contractor for the life of the Contract. Winterization includes evacuation of all water in main, lateral, and drip lines, opening of drain valves, insulation or temporary removal and storage of the backflow devices, and closure of all ball valves upstream of the master valve in the Backflow Assembly. Winterizing the irrigation system shall occur between the following periods.
Western Washington1 (West of the Cascade Mountain Crest)

Eastern Washington (East of the Cascade Mountain Crest)
October 1 through October 15
October 1 through November 15 1Winterizing may be allowed outside these dates when allowed by the Engineer.
In the spring, when the irrigation system is in full operation, the Contractor shall make a full inspection of all valves, controllers, emitters and irrigation heads. This shall involve visual inspection under operating conditions. All adjustments, flushing, or replacements to the system shall be made at this time to ensure the proper operation of all irrigation components. The Contractor shall activate the irrigation system between March 15th and March 31st of each year through Physical Completion, unless allowed otherwise by the Engineer. Activation includes backflow inspection, testing, repair, and reporting, an annual system inspection with the Engineer, all required system repairs, annual battery replacement in all battery-operated controller units, and reprogramming for specific site
Page 8-46
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Irrigation Systems 8-03 conditions. Start up or resumption of fully automatic system operation shall be May 1st, or as allowed by the Engineer.
Automatic controllers shall be programmed according to the Plans or as allowed by the
Engineer. 8-03.3(14)B
Irrigation System Orientation Meeting

An irrigation system orientation meeting shall be held when the irrigation system is complete, and the system is operational. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss system operation and maintenance procedures and demonstrate and confirm functionality of irrigation components including the Contracting Agency’s central control system where applicable. The meeting shall be conducted by the Contractor or irrigation contractor at the project site.
Those attending shall include: 1. (Representing the Contractor) The superintendent and irrigation contractor. 2. (Representing the Contracting Agency) The Engineer and representatives from the
WSDOT Area Maintenance Office. 8-03.4
Vacant 8-03.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid items when included in the Proposal: “Irrigation System”, lump sum.
All costs for furnishing, installing, and operating the irrigation system as detailed in the Plans shall be included in the lump sum price for the complete irrigation system.
This includes all costs for initial and annual inspections, tests performed on crossconnection control devices, electrical wire testing during the life of the Contract, system maintenance and repair, annual winterization and startup, irrigation audits, and as-built Plans as shown in the Plans. When the plans indicate connections to existing irrigation, sleeves or other components, potholing shall be included in the lump sum price for irrigation system.
As the irrigation system is installed, the payment schedule will be as follows: 1.
Payment will be made in proportion to the amount of Work performed up to 85 percent of the unit Contract price for irrigation system when the irrigation system is completed, tested, inspected, fully operational, and upon delivery of the Asbuilts, M&O Manuals and Operating Tools.

2.
Payment shall be increased to 95 percent of the unit Contract price for irrigation system upon completion and acceptance of initial planting. 3.
Payment shall be increased to 100 percent of the unit Contract price for irrigation system upon completion and acceptance of the first-year plant establishment and acceptance of all supplements to the Asbuilts or M&O Manuals. When there is no first-year plant establishment or when the Contract is completed, payment will be increased to 100 percent of the unit Contract price for irrigation system upon completion and acceptance of the requirements of Section 8-03.3(13).
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-47 8-04
Curbs, Gutters, and Spillways 8-04 8-04.1
Curbs, Gutters, and Spillways
Description
This Work consists of the construction of cement concrete curbs, curbs and gutters, gutters, spillways, hot mix asphalt curbs, gutters, spillways, and metal spillways, of the kind and design specified, at the locations shown in the Plans or where designated by the
Engineer in accordance with these Specifications and in conformity to the lines and grades as staked. 8-04.2

Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Cement
Aggregates
Premolded Joint Filler
Drain Pipe
Steel Culvert Pipe and Pipe Arch
Aluminum Culvert Pipe
Structural Steel and Related Materials
Reinforcing Steel
Hand Placed Riprap

9-01 9-03 9-04.1 9-05.1 9-05.4 9-05.5 9-06 9-07 9-13.1(4)
Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) curbs, gutters, and spillways shall be constructed of an HMA mix that will have a dense, uniform surface and will fully retain its shape, grade, and line after placement. The mix components shall meet applicable requirements for asphalt concrete specified in Section 5-04 and shall be approved by the Engineer. 8-04.3 8-04.3(1)
Construction Requirements
Cement Concrete Curbs, Gutters, and Spillways
Cement concrete curb, curb and gutter, gutter, and spillway shall be constructed with except at driveway entrances. Cement concrete curb or curb and gutter along the full width of a driveway entrance shall be constructed with air entrained concrete Class
4000 conforming to the requirements of Section 6-02. Roundabout truck apron cement conforming to the requirements of Section 6-02.
The foundation for curbs, gutters, and spillways shall be thoroughly compacted and required side forms shall rest throughout their length on firm ground. Side forms for straight sections shall be full depth of the curb. They shall be either metal of suitable gage for the Work or surfaced “construction” grade lumber not less than 2 inches (commercial) in thickness. Forms used more than one time shall be thoroughly cleaned and forms that have become worn, splintered, or warped shall not be used again.
The foundation shall be watered thoroughly before the concrete is placed, and the concrete shall be well tamped and spaded or vibrated in the forms. The exposed surfaces shall be finished full width with a trowel and edger. Within 24 hours after the concrete is placed, the forms of the Roadway face of curbs shall be removed, and the concrete treated with a float finish. The top and face of the curb shall receive a light brush finish, and the top of the gutter shall receive a broom finish.
Page 8-48
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Curbs, Gutters, and Spillways 8-04
Expansion joints in the curb or curb and gutter shall be spaced as shown in the Plans, and placed at the beginning and ends of curb returns, drainage Structures, bridges, and cold joints with existing curbs and gutters. The expansion joint shall be filled to full crosssection with ⅜-inch premolded joint filler. When curb or curb and gutter is placed adjacent to portland cement concrete pavement, a ⅜-inch thick, 6 inch deep premolded joint filler shall be installed between the two vertical surfaces to prevent cracking. When noted in the Plans, the Contractor shall install the catch basin gutter pan at drainage Structures abutting the curb and gutter.
The concrete shall be cured for 72 hours by one of the methods specified for cement concrete pavement in Section 5-05. The concrete shall not be exposed to traffic until it reaches 2500 psi in accordance with Section 5-05.3(17).
At the option of the Contractor, the curb and gutter may be constructed using approved slip-form equipment. The curb and gutter shall be constructed to the same requirements as the cast-in-place curb and gutter.
A water-reducing admixture conforming to the requirements of Section 9-26 may be used provided the finished curb and gutter shall retain its line and shape. 8-04.3(1)A
Extruded Cement Concrete Curb
Extruded cement concrete curb shall be placed, shaped, and compacted true to line and grade with an approved extrusion machine. The extrusion machine shall be capable of shaping and thoroughly compacting the concrete to the required cross section.
The pavement shall be dry and cleaned of loose and deleterious material prior to curb placement. Cement concrete curbs shall be anchored to the existing pavement by placing steel reinforcing bars 1 foot on each side of every joint.
Steel reinforcing bars shall meet the dimensions shown in the Standard Plans.
Joints in the curb shall be spaced at 10-foot intervals. Joints shall be cut vertically and to the depth shown in the Standard Plans.
All other requirements for cement curb and cement concrete curb and gutter shall apply to extruded cement concrete curb.
The Contractor may substitute extruded cement concrete curb for extruded HMA concrete curb upon receiving written permission from the Engineer. There will be no change in unit Contract price if this substitution is allowed. 8-04.3(1)B

Roundabout Cement Concrete Curb and Gutter
Roundabout cement concrete curb and gutter and roundabout splitter island nosing curb shall be shaped and finished to match the shape of the adjoining curb as shown in the
Plans. All other requirements for cement concrete curb and cement concrete curb and gutter shall apply to roundabout cement concrete curb and gutter. 8-04.3(2)
Extruded Asphalt Concrete Curbs and Gutters
Asphalt concrete curbs, gutters, and spillways shall be constructed of Commercial HMA as specified in Section 5-04. The HMA will have a dense, uniform surface and will fully retain its shape, grade, and line after placement. Just prior to placing the curb, a tack coat of asphalt shall be applied to the existing pavement surface at the rate ordered by the Engineer.
Set forms will not be required for forming gutter if slip-form equipment of a type approved by the Engineer is used. Gutter shall be shaped and compacted to the required line, grade, and cross section. Connections to any type of outlet shall be constructed so as to form a watertight joint. 8-04.3(3)
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-49

8-04 8-04.3(4)
Curbs, Gutters, and Spillways
Metal Spillways
Round metal spillways shall be plain metal drain pipe 8-inch diameter and when specified in the Contract, the joints shall be sealed with rubber gaskets conforming to the requirements of Section 9-04.4(4). Half round metal spillways shall be half round metal culvert pipe of the size, kind, and thickness shown in the Plans.
In the construction of metal spillways, sufficient bands, elbows, and joints shall be furnished and placed by the Contractor to permit the construction and connection of the spillways as indicated in the Plans so as to carry the drainage from gutters to the inlets and spillways without percolation of the water under and around the Structure.
Spillway pipe shall be laid in a trench in the embankment slope and shall not be placed until after the embankment slopes have been completed and dressed to the lines prescribed by the Engineer. The lower end of the pipe spillway shall be adequately protected and supported by hand placed riprap, concrete, or by other means as may be shown in the Plans. After the spillway pipe has been placed and connected, the trench shall be backfilled, thoroughly compacted, and the embankment slopes restored to their original condition. 8-04.3(5)
Spillways at Bridge Ends
Where spillways are required to be constructed at bridge ends, they shall be constructed in the embankment slopes as described above and arranged so that they will connect to the bridge drains. The pipe shall be plain metal drain pipe 8-inch diameter and the joints shall be sealed with rubber gaskets conforming to the requirements of Section 9-04.4(4). 8-04.4
Measurement
All curbs, gutters, and spillways will be measured by the linear foot along the line and slope of the completed curbs, gutters, or spillways, including bends. Measurement of cement concrete curb and cement concrete curb and gutter, when constructed across driveways or sidewalk ramps, will include the width of the driveway or sidewalk ramp.
Roundabout splitter island nosing curb will be measured per each.
Except for metal spillways, excavation for these Structures shall be incidental to the items involved. Structure excavation required for the installation of metal spillways will be measured in accordance with the provisions of Section 2-09.
Hand placed riprap will be measured in accordance with Section 8-15.4. 8-04.5

Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Cement Conc. Traffic Curb and Gutter”, per linear foot. “Cement Conc. Traffic Curb”, per linear foot. “Mountable Cement Conc. Traffic Curb”, per linear foot. “Dual-Faced Cement Conc. Traffic Curb and Gutter”, per linear foot. “Dual-Faced Cement Conc. Traffic Curb”, per linear foot. “Cement Conc. Pedestrian Curb”, per linear foot. “Roundabout Central Island Cement Concrete Curb”, per linear foot. “Roundabout Truck Apron Cem. Conc. Curb and Gutter”, per linear foot. “Roundabout Cement Concrete Curb and Gutter”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Roundabout Cement Concrete Curb and
Gutter” shall be full payment for all costs for the specified Work including transitioning the roundabout cement concrete curb and gutter to the adjoining curb shape.
Page 8-50
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Curbs, Gutters, and Spillways 8-04 “Roundabout Splitter Island Nosing Curb”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Roundabout Splitter Island Nosing Curb” shall be full payment for all costs for the specified Work including transitioning the roundabout splitter island nosing curb to the adjoining curb shape. “Extruded Curb”, per linear foot. “Cement Conc. Gutter”, per linear foot. “Cement Conc. Spillway”, per linear foot. “Asphalt Conc. Gutter”, per linear foot. “Asphalt Conc. Spillway”, per linear foot. “Drain Pipe ___ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Half Round Plain St. Culv. Pipe ___ In. Th. ___ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Half Round Tr. 1 St. Culv. Pipe ___ In. Th. ___ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Half Round Plain Al. Culv. Pipe ___ In. Th. ___ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Half Round Tr. 1 Al. Culv. Pipe ___ In. Th. ___ In. Diam.”, per linear foot. “Hand Placed Riprap”, per cubic yard.
Hand placed riprap will be paid for as provided in Section 8-15.5.
When catch basin gutter pans are required in the Plans, all costs for providing the widened area of gutter pan shall be included in the curb and gutter Bid item.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-51 8-05 8-05
Page 8-52
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications Cement Concrete Driveway Entrances 8-06 8-06.1 8-06
Cement Concrete Driveway Entrances
Description
This Work shall consist of constructing the types of cement concrete driveway entrances shown in the Plans and in accordance with these Specifications and the Standard Plans.
The widths of the entrances shall be as noted in the Plans. When no width is noted in the Plans, the entrance shall be constructed to the minimum dimensions shown in the
Standard Plans. 8-06.2

Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Cement
Aggregates
Premolded Joint Filler 8-06.3 9-01 9-03 9-04.1
Construction Requirements
Cement concrete driveway approaches shall be constructed with air entrained concrete
Blended Hydraulic Cement Concrete Pavement conforming to the requirements of
Section 5-05.
Driveway entrance concrete may be placed, compacted, and finished using hand methods.
The tools required for these operations shall be approved by the Engineer. After troweling and before edging, the surface of the driveway entrance shall be brushed in a transverse direction with a stiff bristled broom. Curing of the concrete shall be in accordance with
Section 5-05.3(13). The driveway entrances may be opened to traffic in accordance with
Section 5-05.3(17).
When noted in the Plans, the Contractor shall construct the driveway entrance in two or more segments to permit access to an existing driveway. At these locations, the
Contractor shall provide a well-graded and drained temporary approach suitable for vehicular traffic from the abutting Roadway to the existing driveway and a firm surface for pedestrians crossing the approach. When the concrete in this segment of the entrance has reached the desired compressive strength, the Contractor shall route traffic over it, remove the temporary approach, and construct the remaining driveway entrance segment or segments. The joints between segments shall be filled to full cross-section with ⅜-inch premolded joint filler. 8-06.4

Measurement
Cement concrete driveway entrances will be measured by the square yard of finished surface. 8-06.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when it is included in the Proposal: “Cement Conc. Driveway Entrance Type ___”, per square yard.
All costs in constructing the driveway entrance in segments and installing and removing the temporary approach shall be included.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-53 8-07
Precast Traffic Curb 8-07 8-07.1
Precast Traffic Curb
Description

This Work consists of furnishing and installing precast sloped mountable curb, or dual faced sloped mountable curb of the design and type and location shown in the Plans in accordance with these Specifications and the Standard Plans or as staked by the Engineer. 8-07.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Portland Cement
Blended Hydraulic Cement
Aggregate
Reinforcing Steel
Mortar
Water Repellent Compound
Sodium Metasilicate
Paint 8-07.3 8-07.3(1)

9-01.2(1) 9-01.2(1)B 9-03.1, 9-03.2 9-07 9-20.4 9-23.3 9-23.4 9-34.2
Construction Requirements
Aggregates and Proportioning
The cement concrete mix design for precast concrete curb shall meet the requirements of Section 6-02.3 for concrete class 4000 with a 4,000 psi compressive strength at 28 days and an air content between 4.5% and 7.5%. Aggregates used in the manufacture of precast concrete traffic curb shall conform to the requirements of Section 9-03 and shall have a coarse aggregate nominal maximum size of ¾ inch. The precast concrete mix shall contain sufficient fine fractions to achieve the type of surface finish specified herein. 8-07.3(2)
Mixing
The mixers shall be kept in good repair and be equipped with an automatic timing device and a positive device for regulating the quantity of water added to each batch. Such a device must be authorized by the Engineer before use.
After all materials, including water, have been placed in the mixer, the materials shall be mixed for a period of not less than 1¾ minutes, or as much longer as may be necessary to produce a thorough and uniform mixture of the concrete. No water shall be added to any batch after the completion of the initial mixing period. Each batch of concrete shall be completely emptied from the mixer before placing more materials in it. A batch which has not been placed within 30 minutes from the time water was first added shall not be used.
The amount of water in the concrete shall be kept at a minimum consistent with the manufacture of dense curb, free from air bubbles and surface defects in excess of the tolerance limits specified. 8-07.3(3)
Forms
Forms shall be of concrete or steel. The use of forms or molds made of plaster of paris, wood, or other absorptive material will not be permitted.
Bulkheads shall be tight fitting so that there is no leakage of mortar between the bulkhead and form.
The materials and methods used for lubricating the forms shall be such that they will not result in discoloration of the curb at any time. A minimum quantity of lubricant shall be used and all excess lubricant shall be removed.

Page 8-54
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Precast Traffic Curb 8-07.3(4) 8-07
Placing Concrete
The concrete shall be consolidated by external vibration, or by other means if allowed by the Engineer, to produce a dense concrete throughout, having a minimum of air bubbles and honeycombing.
Reinforcing steel shall be placed and maintained in its proper position as shown in detail drawings.
Curb shall not be manufactured in an atmospheric temperature of less than 50ºF. 8-07.3(5)
Removal of Forms
The curb shall be removed from the molds or forms in accordance with the instructions or by some other method acceptable to the Engineer.
The loosening of the curb from the molds shall be carefully performed to avoid excessive shock and straining of the curb. When, in the opinion of the Engineer, undue shock is required to remove the curb from the molds, the stripping operation shall be deferred until such time as the curb may be removed without breakage. 8-07.3(6)

Curing Concrete
Immediately after the concrete has been placed and consolidated in the mold, each unit shall be placed in a curing room fitted with water sprays and maintained at a relative humidity of not less than 90 percent and a temperature of not less than 60ºF, nor more than 100ºF. Each unit shall remain in the curing room for a period of not less than 10 days, except that if Type III cement is used, the period in the curing room may be reduced to
5 days. 8-07.3(7)
Finish
The curb shall have a smooth, glassy finish on all exposed surfaces.
Excess honeycombing in the back of the curb may be cause for rejection of the curb.
Honeycombing areas in the back of the curb which, in the opinion of the Engineer, are not detrimental to the curb need not be patched. The workmanship of the bottom finish shall be such that no mechanical interlocking of the mortar bed and the curb bottom or anchor groove will occur. 8-07.3(8)
Surface Treatment
As soon as the units have been taken out of the curing room and thoroughly surface dried to a depth of at least ¼ inch, two coats of a water repellent compound, meeting the requirements of Section 9-23.3, shall be brush applied. When the first coat has dried, the second coat of water repellent compound shall be applied. 8-07.3(9)
Dimensions and Shape

The curb shall conform to the dimensions and shape shown in the Plans within a tolerance of ¼ inch in length and ⅛ inch in alignment. 8-07.3(10)
Curb Lengths
Curb lengths shall be in accordance with the Standard Plans, except in special cases where different lengths are specified. Circular curbing shall be made only for such radii as called for in the detail plans.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-55 8-07 8-07.3(11)
Precast Traffic Curb
Defective Curb
Not more than 2 percent of the top area in any one piece of curb shall be defective, and not more than 5 percent of the total length of the top corners of reflecting faces in any one piece of curb shall be broken or rounded. There shall be not more than 50 holes in any linear foot of curb. All curb having defects in excess of any of the above will be rejected immediately upon inspection after removal from the forms. However, failure to reject the curb at that time will not ensure its final acceptance. Ninety percent of the curb laid shall not have more than 10 percent of the maximum allowable number of defects specified above.
An air hole shall be defined as any hole ⅛ inch or larger in diameter or depth.
All defects within the limits permitted, apparent upon removal of forms, shall be repaired immediately.
The sum of the length of the lines of discoloration caused by a cracked mold in any one piece of curb shall not exceed 50 percent of the length of the curb, and the maximum length of any single line of discoloration shall not exceed 18 inches. 75 percent of the curb laid shall be entirely free from lines of discoloration. The employment of heat to obliterate lines of discoloration will not be permitted. The process used to obliterate lines of discoloration shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer.
The repairing of molds which are chipped or broken shall be done in a manner that the broken or chipped areas will not be apparent on the curb made in those molds.
All curb in which surface checking develops during the first five days after manufacture will be rejected.
Hidden air holes at or immediately below the exposed surface of the curb, in excess of the limits specified that are disclosed by testing the surface by means of a rubber hammer will be cause for rejection of the curb.
All curb in which cracking is in evidence immediately after removal from the molds will be rejected. A crack is defined as any separation of the concrete of a continuous length greater than 3 inches.
All curb which varies in dimensions, alignment, or surface contour in excess of the tolerance specified will be rejected.
Failure to comply with the Plans, Specifications, or instructions of the authorized representative of the Contracting Agency in the manufacture and laying of any curb will be cause for rejection of such curb. 8-07.3(12)

Repairing Curb
Curb having defects which are not sufficient cause for its rejection shall be neatly repaired immediately after removal from the molds in a manner subject to the approval of the
Engineer. However, no patching or other repairs shall be made without the permission of the Engineer. Patches shall be undercut if, in the opinion of the Engineer, this operation is necessary to achieve a satisfactory patch.
All holes larger than ¹⁄16-inch diameter in the exposed surface of acceptable curb or buttons shall be filled with cement mortar. 8-07.3(13)
Identification Marking
The date of manufacture, the length, and identification number corresponding to the detail layout shall be marked in black paint on the back or end of each piece of curb.
Rejected curb shall be marked on the back or end surfaces in a practical and semipermanent manner to identify each cause of rejection.
Page 8-56
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Precast Traffic Curb 8-07.3(14) 8-07
Shipping
No unit of curb shall be shipped from the manufacturing plant prior to 21 days after manufacture, except, however, that if Type III cement has been used, the units may be shipped 14 days after manufacture. 8-07.3(15)
Sampling and Inspection
The Contractor shall submit, for the acceptance of the Engineer, an advance sample of curb which shall be at least equivalent in color, surface texture, and bottom finish to the standard as set forth in these Specifications. No repairing of any kind shall be done on the advance sample. Upon approval, the advance sample shall be stored at the plant or site of manufacture in a location readily accessible to the Inspector where there is adequate daylight for examination. The advance sample shall be protected from damage and discoloration and shall be used as a standard of comparison for color, surface texture, and bottom finish for all curb manufactured. All curb furnished shall be equivalent in the foregoing respects.
The inspection at the plant will be made just prior to shipment, at which time examination will be made of the alignment, contour, color, cracks, surface damage or discoloration, broken corners or edges, and any other defects which may have developed, and to check the laboratory test reports for strength. However, intermediate inspections may be made to determine surface checking and hidden air holes if it is impractical to examine for these defects at the final inspection. 8-07.3(16)
Installing Curbs
The curb shall be firmly bedded for its entire length and breadth on a mortar bed conforming to Section 9-20.4(3) composed of one part Portland cement or blended hydraulic cement and two parts sand. The anchor grooves in the bottom of the curb shall be entirely filled with the mortar.
Before the cement mortar bed is laid, all dirt shall be cleaned from the pavement surface by washing.
All old pavements and any portion of new pavements constructed under this Contract, which are covered with oil or grease within the curb limits, shall be further cleaned as follows: 1.

The pavement shall be flushed with water. 2.
While the pavement is still wet, sodium metasilicate, complying with the requirements as specified elsewhere herein, shall be evenly distributed over the pavement surface at a rate of 1 to 2 pounds per 100 square feet of pavement surface. 3.
The sodium metasilicate shall remain on the pavement for at least 15 minutes. Where patches of oil, tar, or grease occur, these areas shall be scrubbed with a brush or broom. 4.
The pavement surface shall then be thoroughly rinsed.
All joints between adjacent pieces of curb except joints for expansion and/or drainage as designated by the Engineer shall be filled with mortar composed of one part portland cement or blended hydraulic cement and two parts sand.
The alignment and the top surface of adjoining sections of curb shall be true and even with a maximum tolerance of ¹⁄16 inch.
For sloped mountable curb installed in curves, the units shall be either curved blocks precast to the radii shown in the Plans or tangent blocks sawn to the dimensions shown in the Standard Plans to conform to the specified radii.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-57

8-07 8-07.3(17)
Precast Traffic Curb
Painting of Curbs
Precast concrete curbing shall be painted with two full coats of paint conforming to
Section 9-34.2, as shown in the Plans or as designated by the Engineer. The paint can be applied by brush or spray. The second coat shall have glass traffic paint beads sprinkled in the wet paint at the rate of 12 pounds per 100 linear feet of curbing. The beads shall conform to the requirements of Section 9-34.4. 8-07.4
Measurement
Precast sloped mountable curb will be measured by the linear foot along the front face of the curb. Precast dual faced sloped mountable curb will be measured by the linear foot of tapered block and nosing block installed. Only one face of dual faced curb will be measured. 8-07.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Precast Sloped Mountable Curb”, per linear foot. “Precast Dual Faced Sloped Mountable Curb”, per linear foot.

Page 8-58
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Rumble Strips 8-08
Rumble Strips 8-08.1
Description 8-08
This Work consists of constructing centerline and shoulder rumble strips by grinding hot mix asphalt. The Work shall include cleanup and disposal of cuttings and other resultant debris. The Standard Plans show the patterns and construction details for the centerline rumble strip and the four types of shoulder rumble strips. 8-08.2
Vacant 8-08.3
Construction Requirements
The equipment shall have a rotary type cutting head or series of cutting heads capable of grinding one or more recesses in the hot mix asphalt as detailed in the Standard Plans.
The difference in the surface texture between the high and low surfaces from the grinding shall not exceed ⅛ inch.
Rumble strips shall not be constructed on bridge decks, bridge approach slabs, or cement concrete surfaces. In areas where monuments, drainage structures, induction loop lead‑ins, pavement markings or other features will not allow the rumble strips to be constructed as detailed, the rumble strips shall be eliminated or relocated as approved by the Project Engineer.
The traveled lanes shall be kept free of cuttings and other construction debris at all times.
All cuttings, grinding debris, dust, and other loose materials shall become the property of the Contractor and, upon completion of rumble strip grinding, shall be immediately removed and disposed of outside the project limits. Cuttings and other debris shall not be allowed to enter waterways.
When shown in the Plans, the rumble strips shall be fog sealed in accordance with the requirements of Section 5-02, following the completion of the rumble strips. All pavement markings, junction boxes, drainage structures, and similar objects shall not be fog sealed.
The accumulative error in the longitudinal spacing of the rumble strips and the gaps, when required, shall not exceed plus or minus 5 percent. 8-08.4

Measurement
Centerline and shoulder rumble strips will be measured to the nearest 0.01 mile along the mainline roadway for centerline or each shoulder. No deductions will be made for required gaps shown on the Standard Plans or for the elimination of rumble strips across bridge decks, bridge approach slabs, cement concrete areas, or other areas approved by the Engineer.
Fog sealing, when shown in the Plans, will be measured as asphalt for fog seal in accordance with Section 5-02.4. 8-08.5
Payment “Shoulder Rumble Strip Type __”, per mile. “Centerline Rumble Strip”, per mile.
Layout of the rumble strip pattern on the centerline or shoulders for grinding purposes is the responsibility of the Contractor. All costs involved in this Work shall be included in the appropriate Bid item.
Payment for fog sealing the rumble strip on the centerline or shoulder, when shown in the
Plans, shall be paid as asphalt for fog seal in accordance with Section 5-02.5.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-59

8-09
Raised Pavement Markers 8-09 8-09.1
Raised Pavement Markers
Description
This Work shall consist of furnishing and installing pavement markers of the type specified in the Plans, in accordance with these Specifications, and at the locations indicated in the
Plans or where designated by the Engineer. This Work also includes cleanup and disposal of cuttings and other resultant debris. The color of pavement markers shall conform to the color of the marking for which they supplement, substitute for, or serve as a positioning guide for. 8-09.2
Materials
Raised pavement marker (RPM) shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
RPM Type 1
RPM Type 2
RPM Type 3
Adhesive 8-09.3

Construction Requirements 8-09.3(1)
Preliminary Spotting 9-21.1 9-21.2 9-21.3 9-02.1(8), 9-26.2
The Engineer will provide necessary control points at intervals agreed upon with the
Contractor to assist in preliminary spotting of the lines before marker placement begins.
The Contractor shall be responsible for preliminary spotting of the lines to be marked.
The color of the material used for spotting shall match the color of the raised pavement markers. Approval by the Engineer is required before marking begins.
Markers shall not be placed over longitudinal or transverse joints in the pavement surface. 8-09.3(2)
Surface Preparation
All sand, dirt, and loose extraneous material shall be swept or blown away from the marker location and the cleaned surface prepared by one of the following procedures:
When deemed necessary by the Engineer all surface dirt within areas to receive markers shall be removed. Large areas of tar, grease, or foreign materials may require sandblasting, steam cleaning, or power brooming to accomplish complete removal.
When markers are placed on new cement concrete pavement, any curing compound shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of this section. All liquid membrane-forming compounds shall be removed from the portland cement concrete pavement to which Raised Pavement Markers are to be bonded. Curing compound removal shall not be started until the pavement has attained sufficient flexural strength before opening to traffic. The Contractor shall submit a Type 2 Working
Drawing consisting of the proposed removal method.
The pavement shall be surface dry. When applying Epoxy Adhesives in cool weather the pavement surface shall be heated by intense radiant heat (not direct flame) for a sufficient length of time to warm the pavement areas of marker application to a minimum of 70ºF.
Application of markers shall not proceed until final authorization is received from the
Engineer. 8-09.3(3)

Marker Preparation
Type 2 markers may be warmed prior to setting by heating to a maximum temperature of 120°F for a maximum of 10 minutes.
Page 8-60
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Raised Pavement Markers 8-09.3(4) 8-09
Adhesive Preparation
Epoxy adhesive shall be maintained at a temperature of 60ºF to 85ºF before use and during application.
Component A shall be added to component B just before use and mixed to a smooth uniform blend. The unused mixed adhesive shall be discarded when polymerization has caused stiffening and reduction of workability.
Flexible bituminous pavement marker adhesive shall be indirectly heated in an applicator with continuous agitation or recurring circulation. Adhesive temperature shall not exceed the maximum safe heating temperature stated by the manufacturer. The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with manufacturers written instruction for application temperature and maximum safe heating temperature. 8-09.3(5)
Application Procedure

8-09.3(5)A
Epoxy Adhesives
Epoxy adhesive shall conform to the requirements of Section 9-26.2.
The marker shall be affixed to the prepared pavement area with sufficient adhesive so as to squeeze out a small bead of adhesive around the entire periphery of the marker.
The sequence of operations shall be as rapid as possible. Adhesive shall be in place and the marker seated in not more than 30 seconds after the removal of the pavement preheat or warm air blast. The marker shall not have cooled more than 1 minute before seating.
The length of the pavement preheat or warming shall be adjusted so as to ensure bonding of the marker in not more than 15 minutes. Bonding will be considered satisfactory when adhesive develops a minimum bond strength in tension of not less than 800 grams per square inch or a total tensile strength of 25 pounds.
On Roadway sections which are not open to public traffic, the preheating of the markers by dry heating before setting will not be required provided the adhesive develops the required bond strength of 800 grams per square inch in less than 3 hours. If the Roadway section is carrying public traffic during the installation of the markers, the 15 minute set-to-traffic provision will be enforced, and necessary flagging and traffic control will be required. 8-09.3(5)B
Flexible Bituminous Pavement Marker Adhesives
The flexible bituminous pavement marker adhesive shall conform to the requirements of
Section 9-02.1(8).
The adhesive shall be applied at temperatures recommended by the manufacturer.
The marker shall be affixed to the prepared pavement area with sufficient adhesive so as to squeeze out a small bead of adhesive around the entire periphery of the marker.
Markers shall be placed immediately after application of the adhesive. 8-09.3(6)

Recessed Pavement Marker
The Contractor shall construct recesses for pavement markers by grinding the pavement in accordance with the dimensions shown in the Standard Plans. The Contractor shall ensure that grinding of the pavement does not result in any damage, (e.g. chipping, spalling or raveling) to the pavement to remain. The Contractor shall prepare the surface in accordance with Section 8-09.3(2), and install Type 2 markers in the recess in accordance with the Standard Plans and Section 8-09.3(4).
Recessed pavement markers shall not be constructed on bridge decks or on bridge approach slabs.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-61 8-09 8-09.3(7)
Raised Pavement Markers
Tolerances for Pavement Markers
Markers shall be spaced and aligned as shown in the Standard Plans and as specified by the Engineer. A displacement of not more than ½ inch left or right of the established guideline will be permitted. The Contractor shall remove and replace all improperly placed markers at no expense to the Contracting Agency. 8-09.4
Measurement

Measurement of markers will be by units of 100 for each type of marker furnished and set in place. 8-09.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Raised Pavement Marker Type 1”, per hundred. “Raised Pavement Marker Type 2”, per hundred. “Raised Pavement Marker Type 3-______ In.”, per hundred. “Recessed Pavement Marker”, per hundred.
The unit Contract price per hundred for “Raised Pavement Marker Type 1”, “Raised
Pavement Marker Type 2”, “Raised Pavement Marker Type 3______ In.”, and “Recessed
Pavement Marker” shall be full pay for furnishing and installing the markers in accordance with these Specifications.
Page 8-62
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Guide Posts 8-10 8-10.1 8-10
Guide Posts and Barrier Delineators
Description
This Work shall consist of furnishing and placing flexible guide posts and barrier delineators of the type specified in the Plans in accordance with these Specifications and the Standard Plans, at the locations indicated in the Plans or where designated by the
Engineer. 8-10.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Flexible Guide Posts
Barrier Delineators
Adhesives for Flexible Guide Posts
Miscellaneous Hardware
Reflective Sheeting

9-17 9-18 9-02.1(8), 9-26.2 9-16.2(1)H 9-28.12
Adhesives for barrier delineators shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. 8-10.3
Construction Requirements 8-10.3(1)
Flexible guide posts shall be installed as shown in the Standard Plans and the manufacturer’s recommendations. Delineator color shall be white on the right of traffic and yellow on the left of traffic. The posts shall be installed plumb, plus or minus 1½ degrees. Surface mounted guide posts shall be bonded to the pavement surface.
The Contractor shall submit a Type 1 Working Drawing consisting of the manufacturer’s recommended installation procedures. Only one type of ground mount or guardrail mount flexible guide post shall be used on each project.
When a guide post is installed on new cement concrete pavement, all curing and liquid membrane-forming compounds shall be removed prior to installation. Curing compound removal shall not be started until the pavement has attained sufficient flexural strength to avoid damage to the concrete. The Contractor shall submit a Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of the recommended removal method.
If the ground adjacent to the posts is disturbed in any manner, it shall be backfilled to the level of the existing surface and thoroughly compacted. The surface of the ground adjacent to the post shall be replaced with like materials, including bituminous treatment if previously existent.
When the Plans requires a guide post with concurrent guardrail runs, the Contractor shall either drive the flexible guide post in line with the guardrail posts, or mount a shorter flexible guide post onto the guardrail post in accordance with the Standard Plans.
When the Plans requires a guide post with concurrent concrete barrier runs, the
Contractor shall mount barrier delineators where guide posts are required. 8-10.3(2)

Barrier Delineators
Barrier delineators shall be installed as shown in the Standard Plans or as specified by the Engineer. Spacing shall be as shown in the Plans. Delineator color shall be white on the right of traffic and yellow on the left of traffic. The Contractor shall submit a Type 1
Working Drawing consisting of the Manufacturer’s recommended installation procedures.
Barrier delineators shall be attached to the barrier with an adhesive recommended by the manufacturer. The attachment point on the barrier surface shall be free of dirt, curing compound, moisture, paint, or any other matter that would adversely affect the adhesive bond.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-63 8-10 8-10.4
Guide Posts
Measurement
Flexible guide posts will be measured by the unit for each post furnished and installed.
Barrier delineators will be measured by the unit for each delineator furnished and installed. 8-10.5

Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when included in the Proposal: “Flexible Guide Post”, per each. “Barrier Delineator”, per each.
Page 8-64
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Guardrail 8-11 8-11
Guardrail 8-11.1
Description
This Work consists of constructing, modifying, removing, and resetting guardrail and anchors of the kind and type specified in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and the Standard Plans in conformity with the lines and grades as staked. 8-11.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Beam Guardrail
Rail Element
Posts and Blocks
Galvanizing
Hardware
Anchors 8-11.3

9-16.3 9-16.3(1) 9-16.3(2) 9-16.3(3) 9-16.3(4) 9-16.3(5)
Construction Requirements 8-11.3(1) 8-11.3(1)A
Erection of Posts
Posts shall be set to the true line and grade of the Highway after the grade is in place and compaction is completed. If the ends of a section of guardrail are curved outward or downward, the posts shall be set to accommodate the curve. The length of posts and post spacing shall be as shown in the Plans.
Posts may be placed in dug or drilled holes. Ramming or driving will be permitted only if approved by the Engineer and there is no resulting damage to the pavement, shoulders, and adjacent slopes.
In broken rock embankments, the pre-punching of holes will be permitted only prior to final Shoulder or median compaction, surfacing, and paving.
When there is an underground conflict such as a utility line, drainage structure, or other type of obstruction the Contractor may submit an RFI in accordance with Section 1-05.1(2) for omission of a post(s). Posts may be omitted from a Type 31 guardrail run every 56.25-feet (or every 9th post with standard 6.25-foot post spacing) on a guardrail run, however there are restrictions on omitting posts depending on the proximity to anchors, transitions, location of posts in relation to the slope and proximity to other specialty guardrail configurations. RFIs submitted for omission of posts shall detail proximity to the obstruction, fixed objects, roadway features, and other guardrail features such as transitions or anchors.
In locations where posts are installed through asphalt or concrete pavement, first install openings in the pavement material called leave-outs. The leave-out opening shall either be a 15” x 15” square or a 15” diameter circle. Install the posts aligned centered in the leave-out opening except that a minimum 7” space from the back edge of the leave-out to the back of the post shall be provided. Backfill around the post in the leave-out with base course material. Tamp backfill manually so that the top of the compacted backfill is 1/2” below the pavement surface. Fill the remaining 1/2” of the leave-out with a polymer modified asphalt mastic that is level with the pavement surface. The polymer modified asphalt mastic shall meet the material requirements of Section 5-03.2 and be installed as specified in Section 5-03.3. Payment for this Work shall be incidental to and included in the various guardrail items in the Contract.
Rail elements shall be attached to the posts during the same working shift or protected by a method approved by the Engineer.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 8-65 8-11 8-11.3(1)B
Guardrail
Erection of Rail
All metal work shall be fabricated in the shop. No punching, cutting, or welding shall be done in the field, except that holes necessary when additional posts are required or for special details in exceptional cases may be drilled in the field when approved by the
Engineer. The rail shall be erected so that the bolts at expansion joints will be located at the centers of the slotted holes. All holes shall be painted with two coats of paint conforming to Section 9-08.1(2)B.
Rail plates shall be assembled with the splice joints lapping in the direction of the traffic.
When nested W-beam or thrie beam is specified, two sections of guardrail, one set inside of the other shall be installed. The inside and outside rail elements shall not be staggered.
Galvanized steel rail plates shall be fastened to the posts with galvanized bolts, washers, and nuts of the size and kind shown in the Plans.
All bolts, except where otherwise required at expansion joints, shall be drawn tight. Bolts through expansion joints shall be drawn up as tight as possible without being tight enough to prevent the rail elements from sliding past one another longitudinally. Bolts shall be sufficiently long to extend at least ¼ inch beyond the nuts. Except where required for adjustments, bolts shall not extend more than ½ inch beyond the nuts. 8-11.3(1)C

Terminal and Anchor Installation
All excavation and backfilling required for installation of anchors shall be performed in accordance with Section 2-09.3. In locations where guardrail anchors are installed on asphalt or concrete pavement, construct leave-outs around the anchor posts in accordance with Section 8-11.3(1)A.
Bolts shall be tightened to the tension specified. The anchor cable shall be tightened sufficiently to eliminate all slack. When tightening, the anchor cable shall be restrained to prevent twisting of the cable.
When foundation tubes used with the Wood Breakaway Post are driven, they shall be driven prior to installing the wood post.
Type 2 concrete anchors may either be precast or cast-in-place at the option of the Contractor.
Assembly and installation of Beam Guardrail Non-flared Terminals for Type 31 guardrail shall be supervised at all times by a manufacturer’s representative, or an installer who has been trained and certified by the manufacturer within the last 5 years and for the specific device(s) being installed. A copy of the installer’s certification shall be provided to the
Engineer prior to installation. Assembly and installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The manufacturer’s representative or certified installer shall complete a manufacturer’s terminal assembly/inspection checklist for each terminal installed. The original completed checklist, signed by the manufacturer’s representative or certified installer, shall be provided to the Engineer on the same day that the terminal installation is completed.
When the manufacturer allows it, guardrail terminals may be installed on asphalt or concrete pavement. Guardrail terminals installed on asphalt or concrete pavement shall have leave-outs constructed around the posts. Leave-outs shall be constructed in accordance with Section 8-11.3(1)A.
Beam Guardrail Non-flared Terminals for Type 31 guardrail shall meet the crash test and evaluation criteria in the Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH).
Page 8-66

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Guardrail 8-11.3(1)D 8-11
Removing Guardrail and Guardrail Anchor
Removal of the various types of guardrail shall include removal of the rail, cable elements, hardware, and posts, including transition sections, expansion sections, terminal sections and the rail element of anchor assemblies. Removal of the various types of guardrail anchors shall include removal of the anchor assembly including concrete bases, rebar, steel tubes, and all other appurtenances in the anchor assembly. All holes resulting from the removal of the guardrail posts and anchors shall be backfilled with granular material in layers no more than 6 inches thick and compacted to a density similar to that of the adjacent material. The removed guardrail items shall become the property of the
Contractor.
The embedded anchors attaching guardrail posts and guardrail terminal sections specified for removal to existing concrete Structures shall be removed to a minimum of 1 inch beneath the existing concrete surface. The void left by removal of the embedded anchors shall be coated with epoxy bonding agent and filled with mortar conforming to Section 9-20.4(2). The epoxy bonding agent shall be Type II, conforming to Section 9-26.1, with the grade and class as recommended by the epoxy bonding agent manufacturer. 8-11.3(1)E
Raising Guardrail
For raising guardrail anchors and raising guardrail terminals, the existing guardrail posts shall be raised to attain the guardrail height shown in the Plans, measured from the top of the rail to the finished Shoulder surface. The material around each post shall be tamped to prevent settlement of the raised post.
For raising all other guardrail, the existing guardrail posts shall not be raised to attain the new mounting height. The existing rail elements and blocks shall be removed from the guardrail post. The Contractor shall field drill new ¾-inch diameter holes in the existing posts to accommodate the ⅝-inch diameter button head bolts. When existing guardrail posts are galvanized steel, the new drill holes shall be painted with two coats of paint, conforming to Section 9-08.1(2)B. The Contractor shall then reinstall the guardrail block and rail element at the new mounting height shown in the Plans, measured from the top of the rail to the finished Shoulder surface. The new position of the top of the block shall not be more than 4 inches above the top of the guardrail post.
The Contractor shall remove and replace all existing guardrail posts and blocks that are not suited for re-use, as staked by the Engineer. The void caused by removal of the post shall be backfilled and compacted. The Contractor shall then furnish and install a new guardrail post to provide the necessary mounting height. 8-11.3(1)F

Removing and Resetting Beam Guardrail
The Contractor shall remove and reset existing guardrail posts, rail element, hardware and blocks to the location shown in the Plans. The mounting height of reset rail element shall be at the height shown in the Plans.
The Contractor shall remove and replace all existing guardrail posts and blocks that are not suited for re-use, as staked by the Engineer. The void caused by the removal of the post shall be backfilled and compacted. The Contractor shall then furnish and install a new guardrail post to provide the necessary mounting height. 8-11.3(1)G
Vacant 8-11.3(1)H
Guardrail Construction Exposed to Traffic
Sections of beam guardrail that are removed for modification shall be completely reassembled back in place within 5 calendar days of the date the guardrail is removed.
The Contractor’s operations shall be conducted in such a manner that fixed objects previously protected by barrier or newly installed shall be protected from traffic at all times by a method approved by the Engineer.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-67

8-11
Guardrail
Rail elements shall be attached to the posts during the same working shift or protected by a method approved by the Engineer.
At the end of each work shift, guardrail sections having an exposed end toward oncoming traffic shall have a Type C terminal end section bolted securely in place. 8-11.4
Measurement
Measurement of beam guardrail and beam guardrail with long posts will be by the linear foot measured along the line of the completed guardrail, including expansion section, and will also include the end section for F connections.
Measurement of beam guardrail transition sections will be per each for the type of transition section installed. End sections, except for F connections, will be considered part of the transition section and will be included in the measurement of the transition section.
Measurement of beam guardrail _____ terminal will be per each for the completed terminal.
Measurement of beam guardrail Type 31 buried terminal Type 2 will be per linear foot for the completed terminal.
Measurement of beam guardrail anchor Type 11 will be per each for the completed anchor, including the attachment of the anchor to the guardrail.
Measurement of removal of guardrail will be by the linear foot measured along the line of guardrail removed including transition sections, expansion sections, guardrail anchor rail elements and terminal sections.
Measurement of removal of guardrail anchors will be per each.
Measurement of raising beam guardrail and removing and resetting beam guardrail will be by the linear foot measured along the line of guardrail actually raised or removed and reset. This will include transition sections, expansion sections, anchors, and terminal sections.
Measurement of beam guardrail post used for raising beam guardrail will be per each.
Measurement of beam guardrail blocks used for raising beam guardrail will be per each. 8-11.5

Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Beam Guardrail Type ____”, per linear foot. “Beam Guardrail Type 1- ____ Ft. Long Post”, per linear foot. “Beam Guardrail Type 31-____ Ft. Long Post”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Beam Guardrail Type____”, “Beam Guardrail
Type 1-____ Ft. Long Post”, and “Beam Guardrail Type 31-____ Ft. Long Post”, shall be full payment for all costs to obtain and provide materials and perform the Work as described in Sections 8-11.3(1)A and 8-11.3(1)B, including costs for additional rail elements when nested rail is required, when connections to concrete masonry
Structures are required, and when constructing leave-outs for guardrail installed in asphalt or concrete pavement. “Beam Guardrail Transition Section Type ____”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Beam Guardrail Transition Section Type ____” shall be full payment for all costs to obtain and provide materials and perform the
Work as described in Sections 8-11.3(1)A and 8-11.3(1)B, including costs for additional rail elements when nested rail is required, when connections to concrete masonry
Structures are required, and when constructing leave-outs for guardrail transitions installed in asphalt or concrete pavement.
Page 8-68

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Guardrail 8-11 “Beam Guardrail Anchor Type 11”, per each. “Beam Guardrail ____ Terminal”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Beam Guardrail Anchor Type ____” and “Beam
Guardrail ___ Terminal” shall be full payment for all costs to obtain and provide materials and perform the Work as described in Section 8-11.3(1)C including costs when constructing leave-outs for guardrail terminals or anchors installed in asphalt or concrete pavement. “Beam Guardrail Type 31 Buried Terminal Type 2”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Beam Guardrail Type 31 Buried Terminal
Type 2” shall be full payment for all costs to obtain and provide materials and perform the Work as described in Section 8-11.3(1)C, including costs when constructing leaveouts for guardrail terminals or anchors installed in asphalt or concrete pavement. “Removing and Resetting Beam Guardrail”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Removing and Resetting Beam Guardrail” shall be full payment for all costs to perform the Work as described in Section 8-11.3(1)F, except for replacement posts and blocks. “Raising Existing Beam Guardrail”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Raising Existing Beam Guardrail” shall be full payment for all costs to perform the Work as described in Section 8-11.3(1)E, except for replacement posts and blocks. “Removing Guardrail”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Removing Guardrail” shall be full payment for all costs to perform the Work as described in Section 8-11.3(1)D. “Removing Guardrail Anchor”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Removing Guardrail Anchor” shall be full payment for all costs to perform the Work as described in Section 8-11.3(1)D, including rail removal, if there isn’t a Bid item for Removing Guardrail in the run of guardrail connecting to the anchor. “Beam Guardrail Post”, per each. “Beam Guardrail Block”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Beam Guardrail Post” and “Beam Guardrail Block” shall be full payment for all costs for furnishing and installing new posts and blocks, removal and disposal of the existing posts and blocks, and backfilling and compacting the void created by post removal when new posts or blocks are required for the Work described in Sections 8-11.3(1)E and 8-11.3(1)F.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-69 8-12
Chain Link Fence and Wire Fence 8-12
Chain Link Fence and Wire Fence 8-12.1
Description
This Work consists of furnishing and constructing chain link fence and wire fence of the types specified in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and the Standard Plans at the locations shown in the Plans and in conformity with the lines as staked.
Chain link fence shall be of diamond woven wire mesh mounted on steel posts.
Wire fence shall be of barbed wire or barbed wire combined with wire mesh fastened to posts. Steel posts and steel braces, or wood posts and wood braces may be used, provided only one type shall be selected for use in any Contract.
Gates shall consist of a steel frame or frames covered with chain link or wire mesh. 8-12.2

Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Concrete
Paint
Chain Link Fence and Gates
Wire Fence and Gates
Grout 8-12.3 6-02 9-08.1(2)B 9-16.1 9-16.2 9-20.3
Construction Requirements
Clearing of the fence line will be required. Clearing shall consist of the removal and disposal of all trees, brush, logs, upturned stumps, roots of down trees, rubbish, and debris.
For chain link type fences, the clearing width shall be approximately 10 feet. For wire type fences, the clearing width shall be approximately 3 feet. Grubbing will not be required except where short and abrupt changes in the ground contour will necessitate removal of stumps in order to properly grade the fence line. All stumps within the clearing limits shall be removed or close cut.
Grading of the fence line sufficient to prevent short and abrupt breaks in the ground contour that will improve the aesthetic appearance of the top of the fencing when installed shall be required. It is expected that in the performance of this Work, machine operations will be required for chain link fencing, and handwork will be required for wire fencing except where sufficient width exists for machine work.
The fence shall be constructed close to and inside the Right of Way line unless otherwise directed by the Engineer or shown in the Plans. Deviations in alignment to miss obstacles will be permitted only when approved by the Engineer and only when such deviation will not be visible to the traveling public or adjacent property owners. 8-12.3(1)

8-12.3(1)A
Posts
Posts shall be placed in a vertical position and, except where otherwise directed by the
Engineer, shall be spaced at 10-foot centers. Spacing will be measured parallel to the slope of the ground.
All posts, except line posts, shall be set in concrete to the dimensions shown in the Plans.
All concrete footings shall be crowned so as to shed water. Line posts fences shall be set in undisturbed earth either by driving or drilling, except as specified. Driving shall be accomplished in such a manner as not to damage the post. Voids around the post shall be backfilled with suitable material and thoroughly tamped.
Concrete footings shall be constructed to embed the line posts at grade depressions where the tension on the fence will tend to pull the post from the ground.
Page 8-70
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Chain Link Fence and Wire Fence 8-12
Where solid rock is encountered without an overburden of soil, line posts shall be set a minimum depth of 14 inches, and end, corner, gate, brace, and pull posts a minimum of 20 inches into the solid rock. The holes shall have a minimum width 1 inch greater than the largest dimension of the post section to be set. The posts shall be cut before installation to lengths that will give the required length of post above ground, or if the
Contractor so elects, an even length of post set at a greater depth into the solid rock may be used.
After the post is set and plumbed, the hole shall be filled with Grout Type 4. The grout shall be thoroughly worked into the hole so as to leave no voids. The grout shall be crowned to carry water from the post.
Where solid rock is covered by an overburden of soil or loose rock, the posts shall be set to the full depth shown in the Plans unless penetration into solid rock reaches the minimum depths specified above, in which case the depth of penetration may be terminated. Concrete footings shall be constructed from the solid rock to the top of the ground. After the post is set and plumbed, the hole in the portion of the post in solid rock shall be filled with Grout Type 4. The grout shall be thoroughly worked into the hole so as to leave no voids.
Gate and pull posts shall be braced to the adjacent brace, end, or corner post(s) in the manner shown in the Plans. Changes in line amounting to 2-foot tangent offset or more between posts shall be considered as corners for all types of fence.
Steep slopes or abrupt topography may require changes in various elements of the fence.
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to provide all posts of sufficient length to accommodate the chain link fabric.
All round posts shall have approved top caps fastened securely to the posts. The base of the top cap fitting for round posts shall feature an apron around the outside of the posts. 8-12.3(1)B
Vacant

8-12.3(1)C
Tension Wire
Tension Wires shall be attached to the posts as detailed in the Plans or as approved by the
Engineer. 8-12.3(1)D
Chain Link Fabric
Chain link fabric shall be attached after the cables and wires have been properly tensioned.
Chain link fabric shall be placed on the face of the post away from the Highway, except on horizontal curves where it shall be placed on the face on the outside of the curve unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
Chain link fabric shall be placed approximately 1 inch above the ground and on a straight grade between posts by excavating high points of ground. Filling of depressions will be permitted only upon approval of the Engineer.
The fabric shall be stretched taut and securely fastened to the posts. Fastening to end, gate, corner, and pull posts shall be with stretcher bars and fabric bands spaced at intervals of 15 inches or less or by weaving the fabric into the fastening loops of roll formed posts. Fastening to posts shall be with tie wire, metal bands, or other approved method attached at 14-inch intervals. The top and bottom edge of the fabric shall be fastened with hog rings to the top and bottom tension wires as may be applicable, spaced at 24-inch intervals.
Rolls of wire fabric shall be joined by weaving a single strand into the ends of the rolls to form a continuous mesh.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-71 8-12 8-12.3(1)E
Chain Link Fence and Wire Fence
Chain Link Gates
Chain link fabric shall be fastened to the end bars of the gate frame by stretcher bars and fabric bands and to the top and bottom bars of the gate frames by tie wires in the same manner as specified for the chain link fence fabric, or by other standard methods if approved by the Engineer.
Welded connections on gate frames where the galvanized coating has been burned shall be thoroughly cleaned by wire brushing and all traces of the welding flux and loose or cracked galvanizing removed. The clean areas shall then be painted with two coats of paint, conforming to Section 9-08.1(2)B. 8-12.3(2)
Wire Fence and Gates 8-12.3(2)A
Posts
Line posts shall be spaced at intervals not to exceed 14 feet. All intervals shall be measured center to center of posts. In general, in determining the spacing of posts, measurements will be made parallel to the slope of the existing ground, and all posts shall be placed in a vertical position except where otherwise directed by the Engineer.
Line posts may be driven in place provided the method of driving does not damage the post. Steel corner, gate, and pull posts shall be set in concrete footings to the dimensions shown in the Plans and crowned at the top to shed water.
Concrete footings shall be constructed to embed the lower part of steel line posts, and wood anchors shall be placed on wood posts at grade depressions wherever the tension on the line wires will tend to pull the post from the ground. The concrete footings shall be
3 feet deep by 12 inches in diameter and crowned at the top.
Where solid rock is encountered without an overburden of soil, line posts shall be set a minimum depth of 14 inches and end, corner, gate, and pull posts a minimum depth of
20 inches into the solid rock. The hole shall have a minimum dimension 1 inch greater than the largest dimension of the post section to be set. The posts shall be cut before installation to lengths that will give 4½ feet of post above ground, or if the Contractor so elects, 6-foot posts set 18 inches into the solid rock may be used.
After the post is set and plumbed, the hole shall be filled with Grout Type 4. The grout shall be thoroughly worked into the hole so as to leave no voids. The grout shall be crowned to carry water away from the post. Where posts are set in the above manner, anchor plates and concrete footings will not be required.
Where solid rock is covered by an overburden of soil or loose rock, the posts shall be set to the full depth of 2½ feet unless the penetration into solid rock reaches the minimum depths specified above, in which case the depth of penetration may be terminated. When the depth of the overburden is greater than 12 inches, anchor plates will be required on the steel line posts, and concrete footings shall be constructed from the solid rock to the top of the ground on steel end, gate, corner, and pull posts. When the depth of overburden is 12 inches or less, anchor plates and concrete footings will not be required.
After the post is set and plumbed, the hole in the portion of the post in solid rock shall be filled with Grout Type 4. The grout shall be thoroughly worked into the hole so as to leave no voids.
Steel braces shall be anchored to soil or loose rock with a commercial concrete footing not less than 18 inches on any one side and set in solid rock to a minimum depth of 10 inches in the same manner as specified above for posts. The braces shall be set on the diagonal as shown in the Plans and connected to the post with an approved connection.
Wood braces shall be dapped ¼ inch into the posts and shall be fastened to each post with three 20d galvanized nails.
Wire braces shall consist of a 9-gage wire passed around the wood posts to form a double wire. The wire shall be fastened to each post with two staples and fastened together
Page 8-72

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Chain Link Fence and Wire Fence 8-12 to form a continuous wire. The wires shall then be twisted together until the wire is in tension.
Where the new fence joins an existing fence, the two shall be attached in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer, and end or corner posts shall be set as necessary.
Changes in alignment of 30 degrees or more shall be considered as corners, and corner posts shall be installed. Where it is deemed by the Engineer that a change in alignment of less than 30 degrees will materially lessen the strength of the fence, the line post at the angle shall be supported by the addition of braces or wires in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer. 8-12.3(2)B
Barbed Wire and Wire Mesh
After the pull posts have been placed and securely braced, the barbed wire and mesh shall be pulled taut to the satisfaction of the Engineer, and each longitudinal wire shall be cut and securely fastened to the pull post with devices customarily used for the purpose.
Wire or mesh shall not be carried past a pull post, but shall be cut and fastened to the pull post independently for the adjacent spans.
After the tensioning of the wire or mesh between two pull posts, all longitudinal wires shall be properly fastened at proper height to each intervening line post.
Wire mesh and barbed wire shall be placed on the face of the post which is away from the highway, except that on horizontal curves, the mesh and wires shall be fastened to the face on the outside of the curve unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
Where unusual ground depressions occur between posts, the fence shall be guyed to the ground by means of a 9-gage galvanized wire attached to a gravity anchor of approximately 100 pounds buried 2 feet in the ground. The guy wire shall be securely attached to each strand of barbed wire and to the top and bottom wires of the wire mesh fabric in a manner to maintain the entire fence in its normal shape. If necessary to guy the fence in solid rock, the guy wire shall be grouted in a hole 2 inches in diameter and
10 inches deep. The operation of guying shall leave the fence snug with the ground. 8-12.3(2)C

Vertical Cinch Stays
Vertical cinch stays shall be installed midway between posts on both types of fence. The wire shall be twisted in such a manner as to permit weaving into the horizontal fence wires to provide rigid spacing. All barbed wires and the top, middle, and bottom wire of the wire mesh shall be woven into the stay. 8-12.3(2)D
Wire Gates
The wire mesh fabric shall be taut and securely tied to the frame and stays in accordance with recognized standard practice for wire gate construction.
Welded connections on gate frames shall be treated as specified for chain link fence gates.
The drop bar locking device for double wire gates shall be provided with a footing of commercial concrete 12 inches in diameter and 12 inches deep, crowned on top and provided with a hole to receive the locking bar. The diameter and depth of the hole in the footing shall be as specified by the manufacturer of the locking device. 8-12.3(2)E
Access Control Gate
Access control gates shall be placed to line and grade as shown in the Plans or as staked.
After the posts have been set, the holes shall be backfilled. The postholes shall be of sufficient dimension to allow placement and thorough compaction of selected backfill material completely around the post. Selected backfill material shall consist of earth or fine sandy gravel, free from organic matter, with no individual particles exceeding 1½ inches in diameter.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 8-73 8-12 8-12.4
Chain Link Fence and Wire Fence
Measurement
Chain link fence and wire fence will be measured by the linear foot of completed fence, along the ground line, exclusive of openings.
End, gate, corner, and pull posts for chain link fence will be measured per each for the posts furnished and installed complete in place.
Gates will be measured by the unit for each type of gate furnished and installed.
Access control gates will be measured per each. 8-12.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Chain Link Fence Type ____”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Chain Link Fence Type ___” shall be full payment for all costs for the specified Work including brace post installation and all other requirements of Section 8-12 for Chain Link Fence, unless covered in a separate
Bid Item in this section.
Payment for clearing of fence line for “Chain Link Fence Type ____” shall be in accordance with Section 2-01.5. “End, Gate, Corner, and Pull Post for Chain Link Fence”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “End, Gate, Corner, and Pull Post for Chain Link
Fence” shall be full payment for all costs for the specified Work. “Double 14 Ft. Chain Link Gate”, per each. “Double 20 Ft. Chain Link Gate”, per each. “Single 6 Ft. Chain Link Gate”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Double 14 Ft. Chain Link Gate”, “Double 20 Ft.
Chain Link Gate”, and “Single 6 Ft. Chain Link Gate”, shall be full payment for all costs for the specified Work. “Wire Fence Type ____”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per each for “Wire Fence Type ____” shall be full payment for all costs for the specified Work including payment for clearing of the fence line. “Single Wire Gate 14 Ft. Wide”, per each. “Double Wire Gate 20 Ft. Wide”, per each.
The unit contract price per each for “Single Wire Gate 14 Ft. Wide” and “Double Wire
Gate 20 Ft. Wide” shall be full payment for all costs for the specified Work. “Access Control Gate”, per each.
The unit contract price per each for “Access Control Gate” shall be full payment for all costs to perform the specified work.

Page 8-74
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Monument Cases 8-13
Monument Cases 8-13.1
Description 8-13
This Work consists of furnishing, placing and adjusting monument cases and covers, in accordance with the Standard Plans and these Specifications and in conformity with the lines and locations shown in the Plans or as staked. 8-13.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Commercial Concrete
Crushed Surfacing Base Course
Monument Cases and Covers 8-13.3 8-13.3(1)

6-02 9-03.9(3) 9-22.1
Construction Requirements
Monument Case and Cover
The concrete base shall be placed on a well compacted foundation. The placing of the monument case and base shall be performed in a manner that will not disturb the monument.
The monument case shall be installed by the Contractor after the final course of HMA has been placed. After the monument case has been in place for a minimum of 3 days, the
Roadway surface shall be patched in accordance with Section 5-04.3(7).
When the monument case and cover are placed in cement concrete pavement, the concrete base will not be required.
The monument will be furnished and set by the Engineer. 8-13.3(2)
Adjust Monument Case and Cover 8-13.3(2)A
Removing and Lowering Monument Case and Cover

The existing monument cases and covers shall be lowered prior to planing and adjusted to the finished grade after the HMA overlay is complete.
The Contractor shall reference the location of each monument case to be adjusted. The
Contractor may use location devices, offsets, or any locating method approved by the
Engineer.
Monument cases and covers shall be lowered sufficiently to allow the planer to maintain a continuous profile and grade. Whenever lowered or removed, existing cases and covers shall be thoroughly cleaned for re-installation at the new elevation. The Contractor shall exercise care in removing the existing monument cases and covers so as not to disturb the monument or damage the case.
The Contractor shall backfill and compact all voids resulting from lowering and adjusting the monument cases and covers. Backfill material shall be Crushed Surfacing Base Course (CSBC). The basis for acceptance of CSBC shall be visual inspection by the Engineer’s representative.
The use of monument case riser rings will not be permitted. Debris from lowering and adjusting the monument cases and covers shall be removed from the project.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-75

8-13
Monument Cases 8-13.3(2)B
Reinstalling Monument Case and Cover
The adjusted or reinstalled monument case and cover shall be reset to 1/4-inch above the finished pavement as indicated in the plans and in accordance with the following additional requirements: 1.
The HMA shall be cut and removed to a neat circle, the diameter of which shall be equal to the outside diameter of the monument case plus 2-feet. The base materials placed in the void between the case and the HMA, up to the finished pavement surface. 2.
Prior to opening to traffic, the concrete shall have attained a minimum compressive strength of 2000 psi determined by WSDOT FOP for C 805.
The concrete shall be cured by one of the following methods: 1.
Covered with wet burlap for 24 hours. 2.
Covered with white polyethylene sheeting for 24 hours. 3.
Sprayed with liquid curing compound.

8-13.4
Measurement
Measurement of monument case and cover will be by the unit for each monument case and cover furnished and set.
Measurement for adjust monument case and cover will be by the unit for each monument case and cover adjusted. 8-13.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when included in the Proposal: “Monument Case and Cover”, per each. “Adjust Monument Case and Cover”, per each.
Page 8-76
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Cement Concrete Sidewalks 8-14 8-14.1 8-14
Cement Concrete Sidewalks
Description

This Work consists of constructing cement concrete sidewalks and detectable warning surfaces in accordance with details shown in the Plans and these Specifications and in conformity to lines and grades shown in the Plans or as established by the Engineer. 8-14.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Cement
Aggregates
Premolded Joint Filler
Detectable Warning Surface
Concrete Curing Materials and Admixtures 8-14.3 9-01 9-03 9-04.1 9-19 9-23
Construction Requirements
The concrete in the sidewalks and curb ramps shall be air entrained concrete Class
3000 in accordance with the requirements of Section 6-02. 8-14.3(1)

Excavation
Excavation shall be made to the required depth and to a width that will permit the installation and bracing of the forms. The foundation shall be shaped and compacted to a firm even surface conforming to the section shown in the Plans. All soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material. 8-14.3(2)
Forms
Forms shall be of wood or metal and shall extend for the full depth of the concrete. All forms shall be straight, free from warp, and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing. Bracing and staking of forms shall be such that the forms remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment until their removal. After the forms have been set to line and grade, the foundation shall be brought to the grade required and thoroughly wetted approximately 12 hours before placing the concrete. 8-14.3(3)
Placing and Finishing Concrete
The concrete shall be placed in the forms and struck off with an approved straightedge.
As soon as the surface can be worked, it shall be troweled smooth with a steel trowel.
After troweling and before installing the contraction joints or perimeter edging, the walking surfaces of the sidewalk and curb ramps shall be brushed with a stiff bristled broom. Brush strokes shall be perpendicular to the travel direction of the sidewalk.
Expansion and contraction joints shall be constructed as shown in the Plans. When the sidewalk abuts a cement concrete curb or curb and gutter, the expansion joints in the sidewalk shall have the same spacing as the curb. The expansion joint shall be filled to full cross-section of the sidewalk with ⅜ inch premolded joint filler.
Curb ramps shall be of the type specified in the Plans and shall include the cast-in-place detectable warning surface.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-77 8-14 8-14.3(4)
Cement Concrete Sidewalks
Curing
Concrete sidewalks shall be cured for at least 72 hours. Curing shall be by means of moist burlap or quilted blankets or other approved methods. During the curing period, all traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, shall be excluded. Vehicular traffic shall be excluded for such additional time as the Engineer may specify. 8-14.3(5)
Detectable Warning Surface 8-14.3(5)A
General
The detectable warning surface shall be located as shown in the Plans. The detectable warning surface shall have the truncated dome shape shown in the Plans. 8-14.3(5)B
Cast-in-Place Detectable Warning Surfaces

Placement of the cast-in-place detectable warning surfaces shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation for placement in fresh concrete, before the concrete has reached initial set, or on a hardened cement concrete surface or asphalt pavement surface.
Vertical edges of the detectable warning surface shall be flush with the adjoining surface to the extent possible (not more than ¼ inch above the surface of the pavement) after installation.
Embossing or stamping the wet concrete to achieve the truncated dome pattern or using a mold into which a catalyst-hardened material is applied shall not be allowed. 8-14.3(5)C
Surface Applied Detectable Warning Surfaces
When surface applied detectable warning surfaces are applied, placement shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation; however glued or stick down applications are prohibited for permanent installations. They shall be weather resistant and durable to normal pedestrian wear and maintenance activities, and show no appreciable fading, lifting, or shrinkage. The units shall be capable of molding or fitting itself to the contours, breaks, and faults of HMA or PCC surfaces, and show no significant tearing, rollback, lifting, or other signs of poor adhesion. Permanent installations of surface applied detectable warning surfaces shall be secured with mechanical fasteners. 8-14.4
Measurement
Cement concrete sidewalks will be measured by the square yard of finished surface and will not include the surface area of the curb ramps.
Cement concrete curb ramp type ______ will be measured per each for the complete curb ramp type installed and includes construction of cast-in-place detectable warning surfaces.
Detectable warning surfaces will be measured by the square foot of surface applied detectable warning surfaces constructed as shown in the Plans.
Page 8-78

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Cement Concrete Sidewalks 8-14.5 8-14
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid items when included in the Proposal: “Cement Conc. Sidewalk”, per square yard. “Cement Conc. Sidewalk with Raised Edge”, per square yard. “Monolithic Cement Conc. Curb and Sidewalk”, per square yard. “Cement Conc. Curb Ramp Type ___”, per each
The unit Contract price per each for “Cement Conc. Curb Ramp Type____” shall be full pay for construction of the curb ramp as specified, including the cast-in-place detectable warning surfaces.
Payment for excavation of material not related to the construction of the sidewalk but necessary before the sidewalk can be placed, when and if shown in the Plans, will be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 2-03. Otherwise, the Contractor shall make all excavations including haul and disposal, regardless of the depth required for constructing the sidewalk and curb ramps to the lines and grades shown and shall include all costs thereof in the unit Contract price per square yard for “Cement Conc.
Sidewalk”, “Cement Conc. Sidewalk with Raised Edge”, “Monolithic Cement Conc.
Curb and Sidewalk”, or the unit contract price per each for “Cement Conc. Curb Ramp
Type ___”. “Detectable Warning Surface”, per square foot.
The unit Contract price per square foot of “Detectable Warning Surface”, shall be full pay for surface applied detectable warning surfaces.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-79 8-15
Riprap 8-15 8-15.1
Riprap
Description
This Work consists of furnishing and placing riprap protection of the type specified at the locations and in conformity with the lines and dimensions shown in the Plans or established by the Engineer.
Riprap will be classified as heavy loose riprap, light loose riprap, and hand placed riprap. 8-15.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Filter Blanket ____ (shall meet the gradation requirements for Permeable Ballast)
Gravel Backfill for Drains
Heavy Loose Riprap
Light Loose Riprap
Hand Placed Riprap
Quarry Spalls 8-15.3

Construction Requirements 8-15.3(1)
Excavation for Riprap 9-03.9(2) 9-03.12(4) 9-13 9-13 9-13 9-13
The foundation for riprap shall be excavated below probable scour or to the elevation shown in the Plans, and no stone shall be laid or concrete placed until the footing is approved by the Engineer. Excavation below the level of the intersection of the slope to be protected and the adjacent original ground or the channel floor or slope shall be classified, measured, and paid for as channel excavation or ditch excavation in accordance with Section 2-03. All excavation or backfill above the level of the above described intersection and all dressing of the slope to be protected shall be included in the Contract price for the class of riprap to be placed. Before placing riprap, the slopes shall be dressed to the lines and grades as staked. 8-15.3(2)
Loose Riprap
Loose riprap shall be placed in such a manner that all relatively large stones shall be essentially in contact with each other, and all voids filled with the finer materials to provide a well graded compact mass. The stone shall be dumped on the slope in a manner that will ensure the riprap attains its specified thickness in one operation. When dumping or placing, care shall be used to avoid disturbing the underlying material. Placing in layers parallel to the slope will not be permitted. A 12-inch tolerance for loose riprap will be allowed from slope plane and grade line in the finished surface. 8-15.3(3)
The stones shall be laid by hand on prepared slopes to such thickness as may be ordered by the Engineer. The riprap shall be started at the toe of the embankment by digging a trench and placing a course of the largest stones therein. Each stone shall be placed so that it shall rest on the slope of the embankment and not wholly on the stone below, and it shall be thoroughly tamped or driven into place. The exposed face of all hand placed riprap shall be made as smooth as the shape and size of the stones will permit and shall not vary more than 3 inches from a plane surface on the required slope. 8-15.3(4)
Vacant 8-15.3(5)
Vacant
Page 8-80
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 Riprap 8-15.3(6) 8-15
Quarry Spalls
Quarry spalls shall be placed in ditches and on slopes to be protected, in accordance with the Plans or as staked by the Engineer. After placement, the quarry spalls shall be compacted to be uniformly dense and unyielding. 8-15.3(7)
Filter Blanket
When required, a filter blanket shall be placed on the prepared slope or area to the full thickness specified in the Plans using methods which will not cause segregation of particle sizes within the bedding. The surface of the finished layer shall be even and free from mounds or windrows. Additional layers of filter material, when required, shall be placed using methods that will not cause mixing of the materials in the different layers. 8-15.4
Measurement
Loose riprap will be measured by the ton or per cubic yard of riprap actually placed.
Hand placed riprap will be measured by the cubic yard of riprap actually placed.
Filter blanket will be measured by the ton or cubic yard of filter blanket actually placed.
Quarry spalls will be measured by the ton or per cubic yard of spalls actually placed.
Channel excavation will be measured by the cubic yard as specified in Section 2-03.
Ditch excavation will be measured by the cubic yard as specified in Section 2-03.
Excavation for toe walls and trenches will be measured by the cubic yard as ditch excavation in accordance with the provisions of Section 2-03. 8-15.5

Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Heavy Loose Riprap”, per ton or per cubic yard. “Light Loose Riprap”, per ton or per cubic yard. “Hand Placed Riprap”, per cubic yard.
The unit Contract price per ton or per cubic yard for the class or kind of riprap specified above shall be full pay for furnishing all labor, tools, equipment, and materials required to construct the riprap protection, except for excavation. When it is necessary to dump and sort individual loads, payment will be made only for that portion accepted by the Engineer. “Quarry Spalls”, per ton or per cubic yard.
The unit Contract price per ton or per cubic yard for “Quarry Spalls” shall be full pay for all costs in furnishing, placing, and compacting spalls. “Ditch Excavation”, per cubic yard. “Filter Blanket”, per cubic yard or per ton.
The unit price for “Filter Blanket” shall be full payment for all costs incurred to perform the work in Section 8-15.3(7). “Channel Excavation”, per cubic yard. “Channel Excavation Incl. Haul”, per cubic yard. “Ditch Excavation Incl. Haul”, per cubic yard. “Payment for “Channel Excavation”, “Channel Excavation Incl. Haul”, “Ditch Excavation” and “Ditch Excavation Incl. Haul” is described in Section 2-03.5.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-81 8-16
Concrete Slope Protection

8-16 8-16.1
Description
This Work consists of constructing concrete slope protection, in accordance with these
Specifications and the details shown in the Plans, at the locations and in conformity with the lines, grades, and dimensions as staked.
Concrete slope protection shall consist of reinforced cement concrete poured or pneumatically placed upon the slope with a rustication joint pattern or semi-open concrete masonry units placed upon the slope closely adjoining each other. 8-16.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Commercial Concrete
Semi-Open Concrete Masonry Units Slope Protection
Poured Portland Cement or Blended Hydraulic Cement
Concrete Slope Protection
Pneumatically Placed Portland Cement or Blended Hydraulic
Cement Concrete Slope Protection 8-16.3 8-16.3(1)

6-02.3(2)B 9-13.5 9-13.5(1) 9-13.5(2) 9-13.5(3)
Construction Requirements
Footing and Preparation of Slope
The footing for the slope protection shall be constructed in accordance with Sections 2-09 and 6-02.
The construction of the footing will be incidental to the slope protection, and no separate measurement or payment will be made.
The surface on which application is to be made shall be thoroughly compacted and neatly trimmed to line and grade as necessary to conform to the detail in the Plans. 8-16.3(2)
Placing Semi-Open Concrete Masonry Units
The concrete masonry units shall be placed in a uniform plane and in such a manner that they rest firmly and evenly against the slope with no rocking. The concrete masonry units shall be placed in horizontal parallel courses, and successive courses shall break joints with the preceding course to form a running bond. 8-16.3(3)
Poured in Place Cement Concrete
The wire mesh shall lap a minimum of one mesh spacing, and laps shall be securely fastened at the ends. During the placement of the concrete, the reinforcement shall be held so as to provide a minimum of 1¼ inch of cover.
Where commercial concrete is to be placed upon the slope, the method of depositing and compacting shall result in a compact, dense, and impervious concrete which will show a uniform plane surface.
The newly constructed concrete shall be finished by means of a wood float and shall be striated with a rustication joint as shown in the Plans.
Curing shall be performed in accordance with Section 5-05.3(13).

Page 8-82
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Concrete Slope Protection 8-16.3(4) 8-16
Pneumatically Placed Concrete
Workers – Only workers experienced in pneumatically placed concrete shall be employed; and satisfactory evidence of such experience shall be furnished when requested by the
Engineer.
Equipment – The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer with two copies of the manufacturer’s Specifications and operating instructions for the equipment used. Before placement of any portion of the slope protection, the type of equipment and method of operation shall be approved by the Engineer.
Proportions of Materials – The sand/cement ratio shall be 4½ parts sand to one part cement based on loose dry volume.
Water shall be maintained at a constant pressure that shall be at least 15 psi above atmospheric pressure at the nozzle. For lengths of hose up to 100 feet, pneumatic pressure at the gun shall be 45 psi or greater. Pressure shall be increased 5 psi for each additional 5 feet of hose required. A steady pressure shall be maintained.
Method of Application – Portland cement and sand shall be mixed dry, passed through a cement gun and conveyed by air through a flexible tube, hydrated at a nozzle at the end of the flexible tube, and deposited in place by air pressure.
All surfaces are to be wetted, but application shall not be made on any surface on which free water exists.
Reinforcement – The wire mesh shall lap a minimum of one mesh spacing, and laps shall be securely fastened at the ends. During the placement of the concrete, the reinforcement shall be held so as to provide a minimum of 1¾ inch of cover at the recess.
Finishing – The newly constructed concrete shall be finished by means of a wood float and shall be striated with a rustication joint as shown in the Plans.
Curing – Curing shall be in accordance with Section 5-05.3(13).
Protection of Facilities – During the construction, the Contractor shall protect all retaining walls, columns and Structures from concrete splash or overspray. Suitable covering shall be provided if such protection is deemed necessary by the Engineer.
Test Cylinders – Two test cylinders shall be made for each full day’s operation. The
Contractor shall furnish cylinders 6 inches in diameter and 12 inches high made of ¾-inch mesh hardware cloth. The test cylinder shall be filled with concrete by utilizing the same pneumatic application described above.
The cylinders shall develop a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi at the age of
28 days. 8-16.4

Measurement
Measurement for concrete slope protection will be by the square yard and will include the actual area of the slope covered excluding the footings. The area will be computed on the basis of slope measurements. 8-16.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when included in the Proposal: “Conc. Slope Protection”, per square yard.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-83 8-17
Impact Attenuator Systems 8-17 8-17.1
Impact Attenuator Systems
Description

This Work consists of furnishing, constructing, repairing, and removing permanent and temporary impact attenuator systems selected from the approved list shown in the Plans. 8-17.2
Materials
Materials for inertial sand barrel systems shall be provided and installed in conformance with the manufacturer’s instructions and specifications.
Undamaged sand barrel impact attenuators that have been previously utilized may be utilized in a temporary impact attenuator array only, if inspected and approved by the
Engineer prior to use. 8-17.3
Construction Requirements
The assembly and installation of all attenuator systems, except those utilizing sand barrels, shall be supervised at all times by either a manufacturer’s representative or an installer who has been certified by the manufacturer of the system. If the supervision is provided by a certified installer, the certification shall be within the previous 5 years and for the specific system(s) being installed. A copy of the installer certification shall be provided to the Engineer prior to installation.
Attenuator assembly and installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. This Work shall include the connection to a concrete barrier, bridge abutment or a transition section identified in the Plans. Construction of a concrete foundation or concrete backstop shall be as specified by the manufacturer. Anchorage to the pavement will follow the manufacturer’s assembly and installation procedures.
Unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, concrete foundations and backstops: 1. 2.
Shall be cured and finished in accordance with Section 6-02.3(11).

Attenuators shall not be installed on concrete foundations and/or attached to concrete backstops until the concrete has cured for at least 72 hours.
The manufacturer’s representative or certified installer shall complete a manufacturer’s attenuator assembly/inspection checklist for each attenuator installed. The original completed checklist, signed by the manufacturer’s representative or certified installer, shall be provided to the Engineer on the same day that the attenuator installation is completed.
The Contractor shall have a complete set of replacement parts on the jobsite for each type of temporary impact attenuator in use on the project and shall repair all damaged impact attenuators immediately.
When the Engineer determines that a temporary impact attenuator is no longer needed, then the Contractor shall remove that attenuator from the project. The removed equipment shall remain the property of the Contractor.
Permanent impact attenuators shall meet the crash test and evaluation criteria of the
Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH), except as otherwise noted in the Plans or
Special Provisions. Temporary impact attenuators shall meet the crash test and evaluation criteria of MASH or the National Cooperative Highway Research Project Report 350 (NCHRP 350) as specified in Section 1-10.2(3).
Page 8-84
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

8-17 8-17.4
Impact Attenuator Systems
Measurement
Temporary and permanent impact attenuators will be measured per each for each installation. Only the maximum number of temporary impact attenuators installed at any one time within the project limits will be measured for payment.
Resetting impact attenuators will be measured per each for each installation that is adjusted or reset to a new location on the project. The Contracting Agency will not measure resetting impact attenuators when it is for the benefit of the Contractor’s operations. 8-17.5
Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid items when they are included in the Proposal: “Temporary Impact Attenuator”, per each.
The unit Contract price for “Temporary Impact Attenuator” shall be full pay for all Work associated with the installation, maintenance, and the final removal of the temporary impact attenuator. “Permanent Impact Attenuator”, per each.
The unit Contract price for “Permanent Impact Attenuator” shall be full pay for all
Work associated with furnishing, installing and all other costs involved with installing the impact attenuator in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. “Resetting Impact Attenuator”, per each.
The unit Contract price for “Resetting Impact Attenuator” shall be full pay for all Work associated with the removing, transporting, and resetting an impact attenuator.
If an impact attenuator is damaged by a third party, repairs shall be made in accordance with Section 1-07.13(4) under the Bid item “Reimbursement For Third
Party Damage”. No payment will be made for repair of impact attenuators damaged by the Contractor’s operations.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-85 8-18
Mailbox Support 8-18
Mailbox Support 8-18.1
Description
This Work consists of removing, maintaining in temporary locations during construction, and reinstalling in permanent locations, all mailboxes affected by Construction work in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and the Standard Plans. 8-18.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Type 1 Mailbox Supports (Steel Posts)
Bracket, Platform, and Anti-Twist Plate
Type 2 Mailbox Support
Fasteners
Concrete Base
Steel Pipe

9-32.1 9-32.2 9-32.7 9-32.5 9-32.8 9-32.9
Mailboxes will be furnished by others. 8-18.3
Construction Requirements
Mailbox supports shall be as shown in the Standard Plans.
During construction the mailboxes shall be moved to a temporary location where their usefulness will not be impaired. The boxes shall be reinstalled at the original location or at locations determined by the Engineer in accordance with the Standard Plans.
The existing mailboxes shall be reinstalled on new mailbox supports, in accordance with the Standard Plans, within 24 hours of being removed. The existing mailbox posts shall be removed and disposed of off the project site.
Excavation for new mailbox supports shall be backfilled with adjacent native material and compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
When a newspaper tube is attached to an existing mailbox installation, it shall be removed and attached under the mailbox on the new support, to the satisfaction of the Engineer. 8-18.4
Measurement
Mailbox supports will be measured by the unit for each kind of mailbox support furnished and installed in its permanent location. 8-18.5

Payment
Payment will be made for the following Bid item when it is included in the Proposal: “Mailbox Support, Type ____”, per each.
Page 8-86
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Vacant 8-19 8-19
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-87 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical

8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and
Electrical 8-20.1
Description
This Work consists of furnishing, installing and field testing all materials and equipment necessary to complete in place, fully functional system(s) of any of the following types, including modifications to an existing system, partial removal of an existing system, or complete removal of an existing system, all in accordance with approved methods, the
Plans, the Special Provisions, and these Specifications: 1.
Traffic Signal System 2.
Illumination System 3.
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS)
Unless otherwise noted, the location of signals, controllers, standards, and appurtenances shown in the Plans are approximate; and the exact location will be established by the
Engineer in the field. 8-20.1(1)

Regulations and Code
All electrical equipment shall conform to the standards of the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association (NEMA), Electric Utility Service Equipment Requirements
Committee (EUSERC), and California Department of Transportation document entitled
Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications (TEES). Traffic signal control equipment shall conform to the Contract and these Standard Specifications: EIA Electronic Industries
Alliance, IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), whichever is applicable, and to other codes listed herein. In addition to the requirements of these Specifications, the Plans, and the Special Provisions, all material and Work shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical Code, hereinafter referred to as the
Code, and all WACs and local ordinances, that apply.
Wherever reference is made in these Specifications or in the Special Provisions to the
Code, the rules, or the standards mentioned above, the reference shall be construed to mean the code, rule, or standard that is in effect on the Bid advertisement date.
In accordance with RCW 39.06.010, the Contractor need not be registered or licensed if the Contractor has been prequalified as required by RCW 47.28.070.
Safe wiring labels normally required by the Department of Labor and Industries will not be required on electrical Work within the Rights-of-Way of Contracting Agency Highways as allowed in RCW 19.28.141.
Persons performing electrical Work shall be certified in accordance with and supervised as required by RCW 19.28.161. Proof of certification shall be worn at all times in accordance with WAC 296-46B-942. Persons failing to meet these certification requirements may not perform any electrical work, and shall stop all active electrical work, until their certification is provided and worn in accordance with this section. 8-20.1(2)

Industry Codes and Standards
The following electrical industry codes and standard procedures are listed for reference purposes:
Air Movement and Control Association (AMCA), 30 West University Drive, Arlington
Heights, IL 60004.
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO),
444 North Capitol Street NW, Suite 225, Washington, D.C. 20001.
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 70 East 45th Street, New York, NY.
Page 8-88
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 1916 Race Street,
Philadelphia, PA.
American Wood Protection Association (AWPA), 836 Seventeenth Street,
Washington, D.C.
Bell Company Research and Evaluation (Bellcore) 31220 La Baya DR, Westlake Village,
CA 91362.
Edison Electric Institute (EEI), 420 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY.
Electronics Industries Alliance (EIA), 101 Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, D.C.
Electric Utility Service Equipment Requirements Committee (EUSERC).
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 445 12th SW, Washington, D.C. 20554.
International Municipal Signal Association (IMSA), PO Box 539, 1115 North Main
Street, Newark, NY 14513.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), 17th Floor, New York,
NY 10016
International Telephony Communications Union (ITU) Place des Nations CH
1211 Geneva 20 Switzerland.
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), 2029 K Street, Washington, D.C. 20005.
Insulated Power Cable Engineers’ Association (IPCEA), 283 Valley Road, Montclair, NJ.
National Electrical Manufacturers’ Association (NEMA), 155 East 44th Street, New
York, NY.
National Fire Protection Association – National Electrical Code (NEC), 470 Atlantic
Avenue, Boston, MA.
National Television Standards Committee (NTSC), 445 12th SW, Washington, D.C. 20554.
National Transportation Communications for ITS Protocol (NTCIP).
Rural Utilities Service (RUS), 1400 Independence Avenue, Washington, D.C.
Underwriters’ Laboratories (UL), 207 East Ohio Street, Chicago, IL. 8-20.1(3)

Permitting and Inspections
Electrical installations are subject to electrical inspection in accordance with RCW 19.28.101. Electrical inspections may only be performed by an electrical inspector meeting the requirements of RCW 19.28.321. Electrical installations will not be accepted until they have been inspected and approved by an electrical inspector as required by this Section.
An electrical inspection shall be required for construction of all new electrical systems or alteration to an existing electrical system. Inspections are required prior to energizing all new or altered existing circuit. An inspection is required even if there is no new electrical service or new electrical meter being installed in the Contract.
Installations within WSDOT right of way are subject to inspection by a WSDOT certified electrical inspector as allowed by RCW 19.28.141. A separate permit is not required for electrical installations within WSDOT right of way. Additional inspections may be required at the discretion of the Engineer.
Installations outside of WSDOT right of way are subject to permitting and inspection in accordance with RCW 19-28.101 by the Washington State Department of Labor and
Industries (L&I) or a local jurisdiction approved for that location by L&I. Approved local jurisdictions and their contacts can be found on the L&I website at https://lni.wa.gov/ licensing-permits/electrical/electrical-permits-fees-and-inspections/city-electricalpermits-inspections.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-89 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical

8-20.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of Section 9-29. Unless otherwise indicated in the
Plans or specified in the Special Provisions, all materials shall be new.
Where existing systems are to be modified, the existing material shall be incorporated in the revised system, salvaged, or abandoned as specified in the Contract documents, or as ordered by the Engineer. 8-20.2(1)
Equipment List and Drawings
Within 20 days following execution of the Contract, the Contractor shall submit to the
Engineer a completed “Request for Approval of Material” that describes the material proposed for use to fulfill the Plans and Specifications.
If required to do so, the Contractor shall submit Type 2 Working Drawings consisting of supplemental data, sample articles, or both, of the material proposed for use.
Supplemental data includes such items as catalog cuts, product Specifications, shop drawings or wiring diagrams.
The Contractor shall submit for approval a Type 3E Working Drawing in accordance with
Section 1-05.3 for each of the following types of standards called for on this project: 1.

Light standards without preapproved plans. 2.
Signal standards with or without preapproved plans.
The Contractor will not be required to submit shop drawings for approval for light and traffic signal standards conforming to the preapproved plans listed in the Special
Provisions. The Contractor may use preapproved plans posted on the WSDOT website with a more current revision date than stamped in the Special Provisions.
The Engineer’s acceptance of submitted documentation shall in no way relieve the
Contractor from compliance with the safety and performance requirements as specified herein.
Submittals required shall include but not be limited to the following: 1.
A Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of a material staging plan, should the
Contractor propose Contracting Agency-owned property for staging areas. 2.
A Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of a cable vault installation plan showing the exact proposed installation location by Roadway station, offset and the scheduled sequence for each cable vault installation.

3.
A Type 2 or 2E Working Drawing consisting of a pit plan, for each boring pit, depicting the protection of traffic and pedestrians, pit dimensions, shoring, bracing, struts, walers, sheet piles, conduit skids, and means of attachment, casing type, and casing size. A Type 2E Working Drawing is only required where shoring, bracing, struts, walers, sheet piles, or casing are used. 4.
A Type 2 or 2E Working Drawing consisting of a boring plan depicting the boring system and entire support system. A Type 2E Working Drawing is only required if a support system is used. 5.
Construction lock-out/tag-out procedures shall be submitted as Type 1 Working
Drawings. 8-20.3 8-20.3(1)
Construction Requirements
General
All Work shall be completed in neat, skilled, and professional manner accordance with the current industry standards.
No Work shall be performed on an energized power circuit. Working Drawings for construction lock-out/tag-out procedures shall be accepted prior to the start of Work on
Page 8-90

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20 power circuits. Work on energized signal and data circuits shall be kept to the absolute minimum necessary and shall normally be performed with the circuit deenergized.
Work shall be so scheduled that each electrical system is operational prior to opening the corresponding section of Roadway to traffic.
Existing electrical systems, traffic signal or illumination, or approved temporary replacements, shall be kept in effective operation during the progress of the Work, except when shutdown is permitted to allow for alterations or final removal of the system.
Illumination system shutdowns shall not interfere with the regular lighting schedule, unless permitted by the Engineer. The Contractor shall notify the Engineer prior to performing Work on existing systems.
Traffic signals shall not be placed in operation for use by the public until all required channelization, pavement markings, illumination, signs, and sign lights are substantially complete and operational unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer. New signal systems may not be turned on any sooner than the next working day following the completion of test number 4 of Section 8-20.3(11).
When field repair of existing conduit, innerduct or outerduct is required, the repair kits shall be installed per manufacturer’s recommendations. Repair kits and each connection point between the repair kit and the existing raceway system shall be sealed to prevent air leakage during future cable installation.
All costs incurred by the Contractor for providing effective operation of existing electrical systems shall be included in the associated electrical Bid items. 8-20.3(1)A
Maintenance During Construction
The Contractor is responsible for maintenance of all new, existing, and temporary systems included in the work, starting from the first on-site working day and ending upon final acceptance of the system.
For existing systems where only part of an existing system is included in the work, the responsibility for maintenance shall be determined between the Contractor and the
Engineer as part of the preconstruction conference. Normally, this will be based on whether a majority of the system is included in the work.
Maintenance responsibilities for these systems includes the following: 1.

For all system types, the Contractor is responsible for performing locates for all underground portions of all systems for which the Contractor has maintenance responsibility. Locate requests for these systems will be provided to the Contractor by the Contracting Agency. 2.
For illumination and power distribution systems (power connections from a service or transformer cabinet to a system cabinet), the Contractor is responsible for all work necessary to maintain required lighting operational, including providing and replacing lamps and responding to electrical outages. 3.
For traffic signal systems, the Contractor is responsible for all equipment outside of the controller cabinet, up to and including the landing of field wiring in the controller cabinet. The Contracting Agency shall retain maintenance responsibility for all equipment inside the traffic signal controller cabinet. 4.
For ITS equipment, the Contractor is responsible for all equipment in the system. 8-20.3(1)B
Communication System Repairs
If a portion of an existing communication conduit system is damaged due to the
Contractor’s activities, the affected system shall be restored to original condition. Conduit shall be repaired. Communication cables shall be replaced and the communication system shall be made fully operational within 24 hours of being damaged.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-91

8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical
Damaged communication cable shall be replaced between existing termination or splice points. No additional termination or splice points will be allowed. An existing termination or splice point is defined as a location where all existing fiber strands or twisted pair wires are terminated or spliced at one point. Communication cable shall be defined as either copper twisted pair or fiber optic cables. The Contractor may use temporary splices to restore WSDOT communication systems until the permanent communication cable system is restored.
When damage to an existing communication system has occurred, the Contractor shall perform the following in addition to other restoration requirements: 1.
Inspect the communication raceway system including locate wire or tape to determine the extent of damage. 2.
Contact the Engineer for Fiber Optic Cable and Twisted Pair (TWP) Copper
Cable acceptance testing requirements and communication system restoration requirements. 3.
Initially perform the acceptance tests to determine the extent of damage and also perform the acceptance tests after repairs are completed. Provide written certification that the communication cable system, including the locate wire or tape, is restored to test standard requirements.
Communication cables shall be restored by Contractor personnel that are WSDOT prequalified for communication installation work. Restoration shall be considered electrical work when the path of the communication system interfaces with electrical systems. Electrical work of this nature shall be performed by Contractor personnel that are WSDOT prequalified for work on both electrical and communication systems.
If the Contractor or subcontractors are unable or unqualified to complete the restoration work, the Engineer may have the communication or electrical systems restored by other means and subtract the cost from the money that will be or is due the Contractor. 8-20.3(1)C

Removal of Embedded Anchors
Where embedded anchors attaching existing electrical, illumination, and traffic signal systems to concrete Structures are specified for removal, they shall be removed a minimum of 1 inch beneath the existing concrete surface. The void left by removal of the embedded anchors shall be coated with epoxy bonding agent and filled with mortar conforming to Section 9-20.4(2). The epoxy bonding agent shall be Type II, conforming to Section 9-26.1, with the grade and class as recommended by the epoxy bonding agent manufacturer. The mortar shall consist of cement and fine aggregate mixed in the proportions to match the color of the existing concrete surface as near as practicable. 8-20.3(2)
Excavating and Backfilling
The excavations required for the installation of conduit, foundations, poles and other accessories shall be performed in a manner that prevents damage to the streets, sidewalks, and other improvements. The trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper installation of the electrical accessories and foundations.
Excavating shall not be performed until immediately before installation of conduit and other accessories. The material from the excavation shall be placed where the least interference to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and to surface drainage, will occur.
All surplus excavated material shall be removed and disposed of by the Contractor in accordance with Section 2-03, or as ordered by the Engineer in accordance with
Section 1-04.4 and Section 8-20.3(5)E1.
The excavations shall be backfilled in conformance with the requirements of
Section 2-09.3(1)E, Structure Excavation.
Page 8-92

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20
At the end of each day’s Work and at all other times when construction operations are suspended, all equipment and other obstructions shall be removed from that portion of the Roadway open for use by public traffic.
Excavations in the street or Highway shall be performed in such a manner that not more than one traffic lane is restricted in either direction at any time unless otherwise approved by the Engineer. 8-20.3(3)
Removing and Replacing Improvements
Improvements such as sidewalks, curbs, gutters, Portland cement concrete and hot mix asphalt pavement, bituminous surfacing, base material, and all other improvements removed, broken, or damaged by the Contractor, shall be replaced or reconstructed with the same kind of materials as found on the Work or with other materials satisfactory to the Engineer.
Whenever a part of a square, slab, or section of existing concrete sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway is broken or damaged, the entire square, slab or section, curb, gutter, driveway shall be removed and the concrete reconstructed as specified above.
The outline of all areas to be removed in Portland cement concrete sidewalks and pavements and hot mix asphalt pavements shall be cut to a minimum depth of 3 inches with a saw prior to removing the sidewalk, driveway, slabs and pavement material. The cut for the remainder of the required depth may be made by a method satisfactory to the
Engineer. Cuts shall be neat and true with no shatter outside the removal area. 8-20.3(4)
Foundations

Foundation concrete shall conform to the requirements for the specified class, be castin-place concrete and be constructed in accordance with Sections 6-02.2 and 6-02.3.
Concrete for Type II, III, IV, V, and CCTV signal standards and light standard foundations cabinets, Type PPB, PS, I, FB, and RM signal standards and other foundations shall be using an approved tremie. If water is not present, the concrete shall be placed such that the free-fall is vertical down the center of the shaft without hitting the sides, the steel reinforcing bars, or the steel reinforcing bar cage bracing. The Section 6-02.3(6) restriction shaft. Steel reinforcing bars for foundations shall conform to Section 9-07.
The bottom of concrete foundations shall rest on firm ground. If the portion of the foundation beneath the existing ground line is formed or cased instead of being cast against the existing soil forming the sides of the excavation, then all gaps between the existing soil and the completed foundation shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with Section 2-09.3(1)E.
Foundations shall be cast in one operation where practicable. The exposed portions shall be formed to present a neat appearance.
The top edges of the luminaire foundation, traffic signal standard foundations, electrical service foundations, traffic signal controller cabinets, Transformer cabinets, ITS Standards, and ITS cabinets shall have a ¾-inch chamfer on the top edge of the foundation.
Where one or more of the above foundations directly abut each other, no chamfer shall be permitted.
Where soil conditions are poor, the Engineer may order the Contractor to extend the foundations shown in the Plans to provide additional depth. Such additional Work will be paid for according to Section 1-04.4.
When slip bases are installed the conduit, anchor bolts, and other obstructions shall terminate at a height below the elevation of the top of the bottom slip plate. The galvanized surfaces of the slip plates, the keeper plate and the luminaire base plate
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-93 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical shall be smooth, without irregularities, to reduce friction and to prevent slacking of bolt tension due to flattening of the irregularities. Slip base luminaire foundations shall have a maximum conduit size of 1-inch.
Forms shall be true to line and grade. Tops of foundations for posts and standards, except special foundations, shall be finished to ground line or sidewalk grade, unless otherwise noted in the Plans.
Forms shall be rigid and securely braced in place. Conduit ends and anchor bolts shall be plumbed and rigidly placed in proper position and to proper height prior to placing concrete and shall be held in place by means of a template until the forms are removed.
Anchor bolts shall be installed so that two full threads extend above the top of the top heavy-hex nut, except that slip base anchor bolt extensions shall conform to the specified slip base clearance requirements. Anchor bolts shall be installed plumb, plus or minus
1 degree. Anchor bolts shall be verified at the correct height and plumb in accordance with this Section and Section 8-20.3(13)A before placing concrete. Anchor bolt straps and templates shall not be cut or otherwise modified from the approved shop drawing design.
See Section 8-20.3(9) for additional grounding requirements.
Plumbing of standards shall be accomplished by adjusting leveling nuts. Shims or other similar devices for plumbing or raking will not be permitted except on power installed hot dipped galvanized steel luminaire foundations.
The top heavy-hex nuts of light standards and signal standards shall be tightened in accordance with Section 6-03.3(33), and as follows: 1.
The top heavy-hex nuts for all clamping bolts of slip base light standards and Type
RM and FB signal standards, shall be tightened using a torque wrench to the torque specified in Sections 8-20.3(13)A and 8-20.3(14)E, respectively.

2.
The top heavy-hex nuts for type ASTM F1554 grade 105 anchor bolts shall be tightened by the Turn-of-Nut Tightening Method to a minimum rotation of ¼ turn (90 degrees) and a maximum rotation of ⅓ turn (120 degrees) past snug tight.
Permanent marks shall be set on the base plate and nuts to indicate nut rotation past snug tight. 3.
The top hex nuts for type ASTM F1554 grade 55 anchor bolts shall be tightened by the Turn-of-Nut Tightening Method to a minimum rotation of ⅛ turn (45 degrees) and a maximum rotation of 1/6 turn (60 degrees) past snug tight. Permanent marks shall be set on the base plate and nuts to indicate nut rotation past snug tight.
Both forms and ground which will be in contact with the concrete shall be thoroughly moistened before placing concrete; however, excess water in the foundation excavation will not be permitted. Foundations shall have set at least 72 hours prior to the removal of the forms. All forms shall be removed, except when the Plans or Special Provisions specifically allow or require the forms or casing to remain.
Class 2 surface finish shall be applied to exposed surfaces of concrete in accordance with the requirements of Section 6-02.3(14)B.
Where obstructions prevent construction of planned foundations, the Contractor shall construct an effective foundation satisfactory to the Engineer.
The combined height of the light standard concrete foundation plus the anchor bolt stub height shall not exceed 4-inches above the ground line. 8-20.3(5)
Conduit 8-20.3(5)A
General

The ends of all conduit, metallic and nonmetallic, shall be reamed to remove burrs and rough edges. Field cuts shall be made square and true. The ends of unused conduits shall
Page 8-94
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20 be capped. When conduit caps are removed, the threaded ends of metal conduit shall be provided with approved conduit bushings and non-metal conduit shall be provided with end bells.
Conduits entering open bottom junction boxes shall use sweeps and shall terminate no less than 6 inches and no more than 10 inches from the underside of the box lid. Conduits entering solid bottom boxes and vaults shall enter through knockouts and shall extend no more than 4 inches into the box. The termination point of each conduit is the end of the end bell or ground end bushing.
Reducing couplings will not be permitted.
Existing conduit in place scheduled for installation of new conductor(s) shall first have all existing conductor(s) removed and a cleaning mandrel shall be pulled through. The existing conduit shall then be prepared subject to the same requirements outlined in this paragraph, for new conduit and innerduct, unless otherwise indicated in the Plans.
All new conduit and all innerduct shall be blown clean with compressed air. Then in the presence of the Engineer, an 80 percent sizing mandrel, correctly sized for the raceway, shall be pulled through to ensure that the raceway has not been deformed. This shall be done prior to pulling wire or fiber optic cable and after final assembly is in place. Existing conductor(s) shall be reinstalled unless otherwise indicated in the Plans.
Immediately after the sizing mandrel has been pulled through, install an equipment grounding conductor if applicable (see Section 8-20.3(9)) and all new or existing wire or cable as specified in the Plans.
All conduits shall include a pull tape with the equipment grounding conductor. The pull tape shall be attached to the conduit near the end bell or grounded end bushing, or to duct plugs or caps if present, at both ends of the conduit. 8-20.3(5)A1

Fiber Optic Conduit
Where conduit to contain fiber optic cable or conduit identified to contain future fiber optic cable is installed by open trenching, Detectable Underground Warning Tape shall be placed 12-inches above the conduit unless otherwise detailed in the Plans. Detectable
Underground Warning Tape shall extend 2-feet into boxes or vaults. Splicing of the tape shall be per the tape manufacturer’s recommended materials and procedures. 8-20.3(5)A2
ITS and Cabinet Outer and Innerduct Conduit
ITS conduit and both ends of conduit runs entering cabinets, with the exception of the ½-inch grounding conduit, shall be sealed with self expanding water proof foam or mechanical plugs; unless otherwise required. At other locations conduit shall be sealed with Duct Seal.
Outer-duct conduit with non factory assembled innerduct shall be sealed around the innerduct with self-expanding waterproof foam. Outer-duct conduit with factory assembled innerduct shall be sealed around the innerduct with a multiplex expansion plug.
Innerduct containing one cable shall be plugged using an expandable split plug. Innerduct with multiple cables shall be sealed with self-expanding waterproof foam. Duct plugs shall be installed in all unused inner-ducts (those that are specified as empty) at the time of conduit installation. Duct plugs shall be installed in all used inner-ducts (as specified in the Plans), at the time of conduit installation, unless cable pulling for those innerducts will commence within 48-hours. Installation shall conform to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Foam sealant shall be installed with the following additional requirements: 1.
Penetration of the sealant into the conduit or duct shall be limited using a high temperature backer rod material or rag. 2.
Penetration of the sealant into the conduit shall be limited to 1-inch.

3.
The foam sealant shall not project outside the end of the conduit or duct.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-95 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical
Where open trenching is allowed and conduit with innerduct is installed, a maximum of 1000-feet of continuous open trench will be allowed unless otherwise approved by the Engineer. 8-20.3(5)B
Conduit Type
Conduit shall be rigid polyvinyl chloride (PVC), high density polyethylene (HDPE), rigid metal (RMC) or liquid-tight flexible metal (LFMC) depending on the application.
RMC shall be installed at the following locations: 1.

Within railroad right of way. 2.
All exposed conduit, with the exception of pole risers. Does not include conduit stubs entering boxes and vaults or conduits entering strut-mounted service cabinets from standard concrete pads. 3.
All runs within slip form placed concrete. 4.
Conduits connecting a service or transformer cabinet to a grounding electrode system, unless otherwise specified in the Plans.
Unless otherwise required by the owning utility: 1.
Service lateral runs shall be Schedule 80 PVC or Schedule 80 HDPE. 2.
Pole risers shall be Schedule 80 PVC.
PVC and HDPE conduits shall be Schedule 80 unless installed as innerduct.
LMFC is allowed only at locations called for in the Plans.
Except as described under Non-Metallic Conduit, unless otherwise indicated in the Plans or Standard Plans, the same type of conduit shall be used for the entire length of the run, including conduits for grounding electrode systems, from outlet to outlet.
Innerduct shall have a smooth wall non ribbed interior surface, with factory pre-lubricated coating.
Innerduct within the Traveled Way or Shoulders and innerduct which is not factory installed shall be Schedule 40 HDPE. The innerduct shall be continuous with no splices.
Innerduct which is pulled into the outer duct in the field shall be installed with an extra
2 feet of conduit beyond each end of the outer-duct and shall be allowed to finish contracting for 21 calendar days before it is terminated. Innerduct shall be terminated with end bells flush to ¼-inch out of the outer-duct and the space between the outerduct and innerduct shall be sealed with rodent and moisture resistant foam designed for this application and installed per manufacturer’s recommendations. 8-20.3(5)B1

Rigid Metal Conduit
Slip joints or running threads will not be permitted for coupling metallic conduit; however, running threads will be permitted in traffic signal head spiders and rigid metal conduit (RMC) outer-duct. When installing RMC, if a standard coupling cannot be used, an approved three-piece coupling shall be used. Conduit bodies, fittings and couplings for
RMC shall be cleaned first and then painted with one coat of paint conforming to Section 9-08.1(2)B. The paint shall have a minimum wet film thickness of 3-mils. The painted coating shall cover the entire coupling or fitting. The threads on all metal conduit shall be rust-free, clean, and painted with colloidal copper suspended in a petroleum vehicle before couplings are made. All metallic couplings shall be tightened so that a good electrical connection will be made throughout the entire length of the conduit run. If the conduit has been moved after assembly, it shall be given a final tightening from the ends prior to backfilling.
RMC ends shall be terminated with grounded end bushings. RMC entering cable vaults or pull boxes shall extend 2-inches beyond the inside wall face (for the installation of grounded end bushing and bonding).
Page 8-96
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20
RMC entering concrete shall be wrapped in 2-inch-wide pipe wrap tape with a minimum 1-inch overlap for 12-inches on each side of the concrete face. Pipe wrap tape shall be installed per the manufacturer’s recommendations.
RMC bends shall have a radius consistent with the requirements of Code Article 344.24 and other articles of the Code. Where factory bends are not used, conduit shall be bent, using an approved conduit bending tool employing correctly sized dies, without crimping or flattening, using the longest radius practicable.
Where the coating on galvanized conduit has been damaged in handling or installing, such damaged areas shall be thoroughly painted with paint conforming to Section 9-08.1(2)B.
Metal conduit ends shall be threaded and protected with a snug fitting plastic cap that covers the threads until wiring is started. 8-20.3(5)B2

Non-Metallic Conduit
Where non-metallic conduit is installed, care shall be used in excavating, installing, and backfilling, so that no rocks, wood, or other foreign material will be left in a position to cause possible damage.
PVC conduit ends shall be terminated with end bell bushings. PVC or HDPE conduit entering cable vaults and pull boxes shall terminate with the end bell flush with the inside walls of the Structure.
Non-metallic conduit bends, where allowed, shall conform to Article 352.24 of the Code.
Eighteen-inch radius elbows shall be used for PVC conduit of 2-inch nominal diameter or less. Standard sweep elbows shall be used for PVC conduit with greater than 2-inch nominal diameter unless otherwise specified in the Plans. In nonmetallic conduit less than 2-inch nominal diameter, pull ropes or flat tapes for wire installation shall be not less than ¼-inch diameter or width. In nonmetallic conduit of 2-inch nominal diameter or larger, pull ropes or flat tapes for wire installation shall be not less than ½-inch diameter or width.
When HDPE conduit is used for directional boring, it shall be continuous, with no joints, for the full length of the bore. The conduit run shall be extended to the associated outlets with the same schedule HDPE or PVC conduit. Entry into associated junction box outlets shall be with the same schedule PVC conduit and elbows. The same requirements apply for extension of an existing HDPE conduit crossing.
PVC conduit and elbows shall be connected to HDPE conduit with an approved mechanical coupling. The connection shall have minimum pullout strength of 700-pounds.
Prior to installation of a mechanical coupling, the HDPE conduit shall first be prepared with a clean, straight edge. A water-based pulling lubricant may be applied to the threaded end of the mechanical coupling before installation. Solvent cement or epoxy shall not be used on the threaded joint when connecting the HDPE conduit to the mechanical coupling. The mechanical coupling shall be rotated until the HDPE conduit seats approximately ¾ of the distance into the threaded coupling depth.
For PVC installation through a directional bore, the PVC shall be in rigid sections assembled to form a watertight bell and spigot-type mechanical joint with a solid retaining ring around the entire circumference of the conduit installed per the manufacturer’s recommendations. The conduit run shall be extended beyond the length of the bore, to the associated outlets with the same mechanical coupled PVC or with standard PVC conduit of the same schedule. The same requirements apply for extension of an existing
PVC conduit Roadway crossing.
PVC conduit shall be assembled using the solvent cement specified in Section 9-29.1.
Conduit ends shall be protected with a snug fitting plastic cap until wiring is started.
Conduit caps, end bells and the section of PVC between the coupling and end bell bushing in cabinet foundations shall be installed without glue.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-97 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20.3(5)C
Conduit Size
The size of conduit used shall be as shown in the Plans. Conduits smaller than 1-inch electrical trade size shall not be used unless otherwise specified, except that grounding conductors at service points may be enclosed in ½-inch-diameter conduit.
Conduit between light standards, PPB, PS, or Type 1 poles and the nearest junction box shall be the diameter specified in the Plans. Larger size conduit is not allowed at these locations. At other locations it shall be the option of the Contractor, at no expense to the
Contracting Agency, to use larger size conduit if desired, provided that junction box or vault capacity is not exceeded. Where larger size conduit is used, it shall be for the entire length of the run from outlet to outlet.
Conduit runs with innerduct, shall have 4-inch outer-duct and shall be installed with four 1-inch innerduct unless otherwise indicated in the Plans. 8-20.3(5)D
Conduit Placement

Conduit shall be laid so that the top of the conduit is a minimum depth of: 1. 24-inches below the bottom of curb in the sidewalk area. 2. 24-inches below the top of the untreated surfacing on a Roadbed. 3. 48-inches below the bottom of ties under railroad tracks unless otherwise specified by the railroad company. 4. 36-inches below finish grade when installed using conduit plowing method. 5. 24-inches below the finish grade in all other areas.
Conduit entering through the bottom of a junction box shall be located near the end walls to leave the major portion of the box clear. At all outlets, conduit shall enter from the direction of the run, terminating 6 to 8-inches below the junction box lid and within 3-inches of the box wall nearest its entry location.
Conduit runs shown in the Plans are for Bidding purposes only and may be relocated with approval of the Engineer, to avoid obstructions. 8-20.3(5)D1
Surface Mounting
Where surface mounting of conduit is required, supports shall consist of channel with clamps sized for the conduit. Support spacing shall comply with the Code, with the exception that spacing of channel supports for conduit shall not exceed 5-feet.
The minimum distance between adjacent clamps and between the clamp and the end of the channel supports shall be 1-inch. Channel supports shall be installed with stops, to prevent clamps from sliding out of the ends. 8-20.3(5)D2
Structures
All conduits attached to or routed within bridges, retaining walls, and other structures shall be equipped with approved expansion, deflection, and/or combination expansion/ deflection fittings at all expansion joints and at all other joints where structure movement is anticipated, including locations where the Contractor, due to construction method, installs expansion and/or construction joints with movement. All conduit fittings shall have movement capacity appropriate for the anticipated movement of the Structure at the joint. Approved deflection fittings shall also be installed at the joint between the bridge end and the retaining wall end, and the transition from bridge, wall, or other structure to the underground section of conduit pipe. 8-20.3(5)E
Method of Conduit Installation
Conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved directional boring, jacking, or drilling methods at locations approved by the Engineer. The pavement shall not be disturbed unless allowed in the Plans or with the approval of the Engineer in the event
Page 8-98

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20 obstructions or impenetrable soils are encountered. High density polyethylene (HDPE) conduit runs, which enter the traveled way or shoulders, shall be installed using the directional boring method. 8-20.3(5)E1
Open Trenching
When open trenching is allowed, trench construction shall conform to the following: 1.
The pavement shall be saw-cut a minimum of 3-inches deep. The cuts shall be parallel to each other and extend 2-feet beyond the edge of the trench. 2.
Pavement shall be removed in an approved manner. 3.
Trench depth shall provide a minimum cover for conduit of 24-inches below the top of the roadway base. 4.
Trench width shall be 8-inches or the conduit diameter plus 2-inches, whichever is larger. 5.
Trenches located within paved Roadway areas shall be backfilled with Controlled density fill (CDF) meeting the requirements of Section 2-09.3(1)E, or lean concrete
Type 1 meeting the requirements of Section 6-02.3(2)D, with the following additional requirement: maximum nominal aggregate size shall be 3/8 inch. The controlled density fill shall be placed level to, and at the bottom of, the existing pavement. The pavement shall be replaced with paving material that matches the existing pavement.

6.
On new construction, conduit shall be placed prior to placement of base course pavement. 8-20.3(5)E2
Conduit Plowing
All conduit plowing shall be supervised by a licensed electrical Contractor.
The starting point shall be anchored or held such that conduit movement at the start of the plowing operation is kept to a minimum. Conduit shall be fed from in front of the plow or a mounted reel such that conduit movement is kept to a minimum once it is in the ground. Use of a stationary reel or any other method that results in the conduit being pulled through the plow trench is not allowed.
The feed shoe shall have rollers which conform to the conduit at a radius of not less than
15 times the diameter of the conduit. The conduit will not be permitted to pass over stationary guides nor over rollers or sheaves, which will permit a bend radius of less than
15 times conduit diameter. If the Contractor can demonstrate that such a roller, guide, chute, or sheave is not available, the diameter of the equipment may be reduced to the following for conduits up to 4-inches in diameter: 1.
For conduits 2-inches in diameter or smaller, no bend radius less than 10 times the diameter of the conduit. 2.
For conduits larger than 2-inches in diameter up to 4-inches in diameter, no bend radius less than 13 times the diameter of the conduit.

The width of the tooth and feed shoe shall not exceed the conduit diameter by more than two-inches.
The conduit shall be installed using a continuous reel, with no joints, for the full length of the conduit run, unless conduit splicing is allowed as indicated below.
If an obstruction is encountered that cannot be plowed through, the following remedies shall be attempted in order: 1.
Contractor shall stop the plowing operation and attempt to remove the obstruction.
If the obstruction is removed, plowing operations shall continue along the approved path.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-99 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 2.
Deviations of up to one foot from the projected path may be authorized by the
Engineer, provided the new route does not result in total conduit run bends exceeding
NEC requirements. Deviations in excess of one foot from the projected path are not allowed and the maximum taper rate is 1-inch per linear foot of conduit.

3.
The Contractor may request approval to intercept the installed conduit and route another section of HDPE to avoid the obstruction, provided the new route does not result in total conduit run bends exceeding NEC requirements. Connection between the sections shall be accomplished using an approved fusion splicing method, which is compatible with the conduit manufacturer’s recommendations. 4.
Where none of the above remedies are successful, all conduit installed so far in that run shall be removed and a new plow path established to avoid the obstruction.
In the event of a breakage, all conduit installed in that run shall be removed.
The conduit run shall be extended to the associated outlets, subject to the same requirements indicated when HDPE is installed using the directional boring method.
The depth of installation shall be continually adjusted as necessary to compensate for changes in terrain.
Plowed conduit shall be laid so that the top of the conduit is a minimum depth of 36-inches below the finish grade with the exception that the conduit shall be swept up to enter the knock outs of associated pull boxes or cable vaults.
The plow placing the conduit shall be marked at a proper distance above the plow’s conduit exit point to indicate when the minimum installation depth is not met. The mark shall be visible from a safe distance from the plowing operation when it is exposed above ground. While plowing this mark must remain below ground level at all times, with the exception of the entry and exit points at the end of the run, in order to ensure that minimum burial depth of the conduit is achieved.
If the depth mark on the plow comes above ground, the Contractor shall stop the plowing operation and attempt to correct the placement depth. If the conduit depth can be verified to meet the minimum burial requirements at the location where the depth mark came above ground, the plowing operation shall resume subject to the Engineers approval. If multiple conduits are installed, regardless of the method of placement in the plow trench, all conduits placed must meet minimum burial requirements.
The compacted surface shall be firm, non-yielding, and result in a finished surface that matches the lines and grades of the terrain prior to plowing. 8-20.3(5)E3

Boring
Bore pits shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with Section 2-09.3(1)E.
Directional boring, jacking or drilling pits shall be a minimum of 2-feet from the edge of any type of pavement, unless otherwise approved by the Engineer. Excessive use of water that might undermine the pavement or soften the Subgrade will not be permitted.
When approved by the Engineer, small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate obstructions. When the Contractor encounters obstructions or is unable to install conduit because of soil conditions, as determined by the Engineer, additional Work to place the conduit will be paid in accordance with Section 1-04.4. 8-20.3(5)E4
Directional Boring
Directional boring for electrical installations shall be supervised by a licensed electrical contractor in accordance with Section 8-20.1(1).
Where directional boring is called for, conduit shall be installed using a surface-launched, steerable drilling tool. Drilling shall be accomplished using a high-pressure fluid jet tool-
Page 8-100
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20 head. The drilling fluid shall be used to maintain the stability of the tunnel, reduce drag on the conduit, and provide backfill between the conduit and tunnel.
A guidance system that measures the depth, lateral position, and roll shall be used to guide the tool-head when creating the pilot hole. Once the pilot hole is established, a reamer and swivel shall be used to install the conduit. Reaming diameter shall not exceed
1.5 times the diameter of the conduits being installed.
Conduit that is being pulled into the boring shall be installed in such a manner that the conduit is not damaged during installation. The pullback force on the conduit shall be controlled to prevent damage to the conduit.
A vacuum spoils extraction system shall be used to remove excess spoils generated during the installation. Excess drilling fluid and spoils shall be disposed of. The method and location used for disposal of excess drilling fluid and spoils shall be subject to the
Engineer’s approval. Drilling fluid returns (caused by fracturing of formations) at locations other than the entry and exit points shall be minimized. Drilling fluid that surfaces through fracturing shall be cleaned up immediately. Mobile spoils-removal equipment capable of quickly removing spoils from entry or exit pits and areas with returns caused by fracturing shall be used as necessary during drilling operations. 8-20.3(5)E5

Boring with Casing
Where boring with casing is called for, the casing shall be placed using an auger inside the casing to remove the soil as the casing is jacked forward. The auger head shall proceed no more than 4-inches ahead of the pipe being jacked. Boring operations shall be conducted to prevent caving ahead of the pipe. Installed casing pipe shall be free from grease, dirt, rust, moisture, and all other deleterious contaminants.
The space between the conduit and casing shall be plugged with sandbags and a grout seal 12-inches thick at each end of the casing. Casing abandoned due to an encountered obstruction shall be grout sealed in the same manner. Grout shall conform to
Section 9-20.3(4).
In lieu of sandbags and grout, unopened prepackaged concrete and grout may be used to seal the casing.
Material shall not be removed from the boring pit by washing or sluicing.
All joints shall be welded by a Washington State certified welder. Welding shall conform to AWS D 1.1-80 Structural Welding Code, Section 3, Workmanship. 8-20.3(6)
Junction Boxes, Cable Vaults, and Pull Boxes
Standard Duty and Heavy-Duty junction boxes, pull boxes, and cable vaults shall be installed at the locations shown in the Plans. The Contractor may install, at no expense to the Contracting Agency, such additional boxes as may be desired to facilitate the Work.
Junction box installation shall conform to details in the Standard Plans.
Cable vaults and pull boxes shall be installed in accordance with the following: 1.

Excavation shall be performed in accordance with Section 2-09. 2.
Cable vaults and pull boxes shall be installed on 6-inches of crushed surfacing, in accordance with Section 9-03.9(3), placed on a compacted or undisturbed level foundation. 3.
Conduits shall only enter through knockouts. All openings around conduits shall be sealed and filled with grout in accordance with Sections 6-02.3(20), and 9-20.3(4) to prevent water and debris from entering the vaults or pull boxes. 4.
Backfilling around the Work shall not be allowed until the concrete or mortar has set. 5.
Pull boxes shall be installed in accordance with Plans and details.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-101 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 6.
Pull boxes shall be configured such that the tensile and bending limitations of the fiber optic and other cables are not compromised. Pull boxes shall be configured to mechanically protect the fiber optic and other cables against installation force as well as inert forces after cable pulling operations.

7.
Upon acceptance of Work, cable vaults, and pull boxes shall be free of debris and ready for cable installation. All grounding requirements shall be met prior to cable installation. 8.
Where installed near steel casings, the pull boxes and cable vaults shall be offset 3 feet, minimum, from the centerline of the casing. Factory bends shall be used to route the conduits to the cable vault or pull box.
Adjustments involving raising or lowering the junction boxes shall require conduit modification if the resultant clearance between the top of the conduit and the junction box lid becomes less than 6 inches or more than 10 inches in accordance with the Plans.
Cable vaults and pull boxes shall be adjusted to final grade using risers or rings manufactured by the cable vault and pull box manufacturer. Cable vaults and pull boxes with traffic bearing lids shall be raised to final grade using ring risers to raise the cover only. All voids resulting from the adjustment shall be backfilled with materials matching adjacent surfacing material and compacted in accordance with Section 2-09.3(1)E.
Damage to the junction boxes, pull boxes, cable vaults and the associated conduit system, or wiring resulting from the Contractor’s operations, shall be repaired to the Engineer’s satisfaction at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency.
Both existing and new junction boxes, pull boxes, and cable vaults shall be adjusted to be flush with the finished grade as well as with the grade during the various construction stages proposed in the Contract.
Where conduit and junction boxes are placed in barrier, the Contractor shall coordinate the Work of the Contractor constructing the barrier and the electrical Contractor so that each junction box placed in the barrier is placed in correct alignment with respect to the barrier, with the face of the box flush or uniformly chamfered within ⅛ inch of the barrier surface. If any point on the surface of the junction box placed in barrier is recessed more than ⅛ inch from the surface of the barrier, the Contractor shall install a box extension meeting the Engineer’s approval and grout around the extension or remove and replace the entire section of barrier.
Standard Duty pull boxes, cable vaults, and junction boxes installed in sidewalks, walkways, and shared-use paths shall have slip-resistant surfaces, be flush with the surface, and match the grade of the sidewalk, walkway, and Pathways. The boxes, vaults, and junction boxes shall not be placed in curb ramps, curb ramp landings, or the gutter areas associated with the curb ramps. 8-20.3(7)
Messenger Cable, Fittings

Messenger cable shall be secured to steel strain poles by means of pole bands, and to timber poles by means of single strand guy eye bolts. Pole bands and eyebolts shall be installed as detailed in the Plans.
Messenger cable shall be secured to eye bolts or strain clamps at poles by the use of approved self-locking cable clamp type dead-ending devices. Messenger cable shall be secured to bull rings and anchors by two approved U-bolt connectors and guy thimbles.
Traffic signal control cable shall be secured to the messenger cable by cable ties. The ties shall be black nylon with ultraviolet protection and rated at 120-pound minimum unlocking strength.
Down guy assemblies shall be installed as detailed in the Standard Plans.
Page 8-102
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20.3(8) 8-20
Wiring
All underground wiring shall be installed in conduit unless specifically noted otherwise in the Contract. All wiring in conduit shall be installed with a lubricant recommended by cable/conductor manufacturer. When wiring is noted for future connection, the ends of each wire or cable shall be sealed with an approved heat shrink end cap.
Induction loop circuits, magnetometer circuits and illumination circuits may have splices as required here and in the Standard Plans. All other wiring shall run continuously, without splices, from a terminal located in a cabinet, compartment, pedestrian pushbutton assembly, or signal head to a similarly located terminal. Terminal connections may not be installed below grade such as in junction boxes or vaults.
If loop lead splices are not installed immediately after the installation of the loop leads into the adjacent junction box, the ends of the two conductor “home run” cable shall be sealed with heat shrink end caps to prevent entry of moisture into the two-conductor cable.
All coaxial cables shall have heat shrink end caps installed prior to aerial or underground installation of the cables to prevent moisture entry into the cable.
Multiconductor cable for signal displays shall be installed entirely through the mounting fitting. The outer insulation shall extend a minimum of 1 inch inside the signal display housing before being stripped back for the connection of individual conductors to the terminal block.
Installation of coaxial or coaxial/Siamese cable or data cables with a 600 VAC rating will be allowed in the same raceway with 480 VAC illumination cable.
All termination for traffic signal control systems shall follow the conductor sequence color code as shown in the following table.
Conductor Number

Color Code
Color Trace
Use 1
R
Red
Red or Don’t Walk 2
O
Orange
Yellow or Spare 3
G

Green
Green or Walk 4
W
White
Neutral
Ped Call or Spare 5
B
Black 6
Wb
White/Black

Neutral or Spare 7
Bl
Blue
Ped Call or Spare 8
Rb
Red/Black
Red or Don’t Walk 9
Ob
Orange/Black
Yellow or Spare

10
Gb
Green/Black
Green or Walk
Quick disconnect connectors shall be installed in the base of all poles supporting a luminaire. Every conductor above ground potential shall be served by a fused quick disconnect kit. Every conductor at ground potential shall be served by an unfused quick disconnect kit.
Pole and bracket cable meeting the requirements of Section 9-29.3(2)D shall be installed between the quick disconnects and the luminaire and between the sign light hand hole and the isolation switch. In addition, the conductors from the isolation switch and the sign light shall be minimum AWG 14, meeting the requirements of Section 9-29.3(2)A or 9-29.3(2)B. Pole and bracket cable jacket shall be removed from the quick disconnect to within 2 inches below the support bracket clamp.
Sufficient slack wire shall be installed at each junction box to allow conductors, cables, or splices within the junction box to be raised a minimum of 18 inches outside of the box.
Drip loops shall be provided on all aerial conductors where they enter poles, signal heads, or weather heads.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-103 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20.3(8)A
Splices
All splices in underground illumination circuits, induction loops circuits, and magnetometer circuits shall be installed in junction boxes. The only splice allowed in induction loop circuits and magnetometer circuits shall be the splice connecting the induction loop lead in conductors or magnetometer lead in conductors to the shielded lead in cable.
Splices for induction loop circuits and magnetometer circuits shall be one of the following: 1.
Heat shrink type with moisture blocking, sized for conductors. 2.
Epoxy filled clear rigid mold splice kits. 3.
Rigid re-enterable type splice kits.
Only one conductor or one multiconductor cable per wire entrance will be allowed in rigid mold splices. Conductors for rigid mold kits shall be centered in the splice mold prior to installation of the encapsulation material.
Magnetometer and induction loop splices shall be soldered. All connections with #10 and smaller wire shall use copper crimped connectors installed with a positive action (ratchet) tool, except where setscrew connections are allowed for quick disconnects as described in Section 9-29.7. The non-insulated die shall be an indent type and insulated die shall be of a smooth shape capable of crimping pre-insulated terminals and connectors. The tool shall be compound lever type with a ratchet mechanism to ensure positive closure for full crimping cycle. The tool shall be field adjustable to proper calibration with common tools and materials.
Splices and taps on underground circuits shall be made with solderless crimp connectors meeting the requirements of Section 9-29.12.
All connectors installed in splices shall be wrapped with two layers of electrical tape. All epoxy splice kits shall be physically separated from other splices and wiring within the junction box to avoid damage from heat during the casting process.
Aerial illumination splices shall employ vice or crimp type pressure connectors. Splice insulation may be epoxy, heat shrink, or tape. Tape splice insulation, where allowed, shall consist of thermoplastic electrical insulating tape equivalent to the original wire insulation rating. It shall be well lapped over the original insulation, and there shall be a coating of moisture resistant varnish applied and allowed to dry. Two layers of friction tape will then be applied, and the splice shall be finished with a second complete coating of moisture resistant varnish. 8-20.3(8)B

Identification
Insulated neutral conductors shall be identified in accordance with the NEC requirements.
Every conductor at every wire termination, connector, or device shall have an approved wire marking sleeve bearing as its legend, the circuit number indicated in the Contract. All terminal strips shall also bear the circuit number consistent with the Contract.
All wiring shall be labeled at all junction boxes, pull boxes, cable vaults, poles, and cabinets with an approved tag with legends as follows: 1.
Individual conductors – the circuit number indicated in the Contract. 2.
Multiconductor cable – the numbers of the signal heads and/or pedestrian pushbuttons served. One cable serving multiple displays or pushbuttons may be labeled with just the phase number (or numbers if more than one phase served). 3.
Loop lead-in cable – the numbers of the loops served. 4.
Magnetometer cable – the numbers of the magnetometers served. 5.
Video detection camera lead-in cable – the numbers of the phases the camera served.
Page 8-104

2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20 6.
ITS cameras – the number of the camera indicated in the Contract and the number of the associated cabinet as indicated in the Plans. 7.
Communication cable – Interconnect cable shall be labeled as the system type and IC, such as SGIC for signal or RRIC for railroad. All others shall be labeled as Comm. 8.
Fiber-optic cables and patch cords - as shown in the Plans.
For all illumination circuit splices, each wire entering the splice shall have an approved wire marking sleeve bearing as its legend the circuit number indicated in the Contract.
For induction loop splices, all wires entering each splice shall be labeled as shown in the
Standard Plans. 8-20.3(8)C
Wire and Cable Pulling
When conductors, either cable or single, are being installed, the Contractor shall not exceed the tension limitations recommended by the manufacturer. Conductors may be pulled directly by hand or with mechanical assistance. If conductors are pulled by mechanical means, a dynamometer with drop-needle hand shall be used on every mechanically assisted pull.
On mechanically assisted pulls, insulation shall be stripped off the individual conductor and the conductor formed into a pulling eye and firmly attached to the pulling rope/tape, or a cable grip shall be used.
The Contractor shall determine the maximum allowable pulling tension, taking into account the direction of the pull, type of raceway, cable geometry, weight of the cable, the coefficient of friction, and side wall pressure, using the information from the cable manufacturer. If there are bends in the raceway or sheaves are used for the cable pull, the contractor shall use the cable manufacture’s side wall pressure limits to determine the maximum pulling tension.
The maximum pulling force applied directly to the conductor when pulling eyes are used or when the conductor is formed into a loop, shall be limited to that shown in the following table for copper conductor. When a cable grip is applied over nonmetallic sheathed cables, the maximum pulling force shall be limited to 1,000 pounds provided this is not in excess of the force as determined above.
Conductor

Pounds 8 132 6 210 4 334 3 421 2 531 1 669 1/0 845 2/0 1,065 3/0 1,342 4/0 1,693
250 Kcmil 2,000
500 Kcmil 4,000
Adequate lubrication of the proper type to reduce friction in conduit and duct pulls shall be utilized. The grease and oil-type lubricants used on lead sheathed cables shall not be used on nonmetallic sheathed cables. Pulling tape shall meet the requirements of Section 9-29.1(10). Pull string may not be used.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-105 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20.3(9)
Bonding, Grounding
All system bonding and grounding shall be complete and approved before energizing associated circuits or equipment, including before energizing a new or modified circuit in an existing system.
All metallic appurtenances containing electrical conductors (such as luminaires, light standards, cabinets, or metallic conduit) shall be made mechanically and electrically secure to form continuous systems that are effectively grounded.
Install an equipment grounding conductor in all new conduit, whether or not the equipment grounding conductor is called for in the wire schedule. For each new conduit with innerduct install an equipment grounding conductor in only one of the innerducts unless otherwise required by the NEC or the plans. Messenger cable shall be bonded to steel strain poles by means of a bond strap connected between an approved U-bolt connector and a bonding lug on the pole. The equipment ground conductor shall not be cut or spliced except at junction boxes.
At points where shields or shielded conductors are grounded, the shields shall be neatly wired and terminated on grounding terminal strip.
Bonding jumpers and equipment grounding conductors meeting the requirements of
Section 9-29.3(2)A3 shall be minimum #8 AWG, installed in accordance with the NEC.
Where existing conduits are used for the installation of new circuits, an equipment grounding conductor shall be installed unless an existing equipment ground conductor, which is appropriate for the largest circuit, is already present in the existing raceway. The equipment ground conductor between the isolation switch and the sign lighter fixtures shall be minimum #14 AWG stranded copper conductor. Where parallel circuits are enclosed in a common conduit, the equipment-grounding conductor shall be sized by the largest overcurrent device serving any circuit contained within the conduit.
All connectors between bonding jumpers and equipment grounding conductors shall be installed in accordance with the NEC. Identification of the equipment grounding conductor shall conform to all code requirements.
Junction boxes with metallic lids shall have one 4-foot long tinned braided copper equipment bonding strap with full circle connector lugs installed from each metallic junction box lid(s) to the junction box frame. A non-insulated stranded copper conductor, minimum #8 AWG, with a full circle crimp on connector (crimped with a manufacturer recommended crimper) shall be connected to the junction box frame or frame bonding stud, the other end shall be crimped to the equipment bonding conductor, using a “C” type crimp connector. 8-20.3(9)A

Supplemental Grounding
Supplemental grounding shall be provided at light standards, signal standards, cantilever and sign bridge structures. Steel signposts which support signs with sign lighting or flashing beacons shall also have supplemental grounding.
The supplemental ground conductor shall be connected to the foundation rebar (all rebar crossings shall be wire tied) by means of a grounding connector listed for use in concrete, and lead up directly adjacent to a conduit installed within the foundation. The free end of the conductor shall be terminated to the ground terminal, with an approved clamp, within the pole. If no ground terminal is provided, bond to standard or post. Three feet of slack shall be provided inside the standard.
Where a concrete and rebar foundation is not used the supplemental ground shall be a grounding electrode placed in the hole next to the post prior to back fill. For light standards, signal standards, cantilever and sign bridge Structures the supplemental grounding conductor shall be #4 AWG non-insulated stranded copper conductor. For steel sign posts which support signs with sign lighting or flashing beacons the supplemental grounding conductor shall be #6 AWG non‑insulated stranded copper conductor.
Page 8-106
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20.3(9)B 8-20
Service Grounding
Bonding of the equipment grounding system and neutral at the service point shall be accomplished as required under the NEC. Grounding of the neutral shall be accomplished only at the service or at a separately derived system.
Install a two grounding electrode system at each service entrance point, at each electrical service installation and at each separately derived power source. The service entrance grounding electrode system shall conform to the “Service Ground” detail in the Standard
Plans. If soil conditions make vertical grounding electrode installation impossible an alternate installation procedure as described in the NEC may be used. Maintain a minimum of 6 feet of separation between any two grounding electrodes within the grounding system. Grounding electrodes shall be bonded copper, ferrous core materials and shall be solid rods not less than 10 feet in length if they are ½ inch in diameter or not less than 8 feet in length if they are ⅝ inch or larger in diameter.
The connection of the grounding electrode conductor to the grounding electrode shall be made with two approved ground clamps. 8-20.3(10)

Service, Transformer and ITS Cabinets
Power sources shown in the Plans are approximate only; exact location will be determined in the field.
Aerial fed service and transformer cabinets shall include the following: 1.
A timber pole, as specified in Section 9-29.6(3). 2.
A meter base, installed in accordance with serving utility requirements. 3.
A 2- or 3-wire service breaker of size noted in the Plans. 4.
The necessary conduit risers and ground assembly as noted in the Standard Plans.
The timber pole shall be set at a depth of 10 percent of the total pole length plus 2 feet, with a minimum burial depth of 6 feet. Modified type B, type D and type E services shall be installed per Contract Plan, and service description in Standard Plans. Pad mounted transformer cabinets shall be installed per Contract Plans.
The service breaker shall be a standard thermal circuit breaker encased in a raintight housing that can be padlocked.
Where remote metering is used, a service rated disconnect shall be installed on the customer side of the meter. This disconnect may be installed in the customer section of a meter pedestal or as a standalone enclosure for pole mounted meters.
Upon request of the Contractor, the Engineer will make the necessary arrangements with the serving utility to complete the service connections. Electrical energy used prior to Completion of the Contract will be charged to the Contractor, except that the cost of energy used for public benefit, when the Engineer orders such operation, will be borne by the Contracting Agency.
Service cabinets shall be marked with the service agreement letters (upper-case) and numbers as noted in the Plans. All other cabinets shall be marked with the designated 10-character identification designation (numbers and lower-case letters) shown in the
Plans. The markings shall be installed on the outside cabinet door near the top of the cabinet. The markings shall be 4-inch block gothic letters (similar to series C highway lettering) using stencils and black enamel alkyd gloss paint conforming to Federal
Specification TT-E-489F. 8-20.3(11)

Testing
Traffic signal and ITS control cabinets shall be tested at the State Materials Laboratory unless otherwise designated in the Contract. Where initial testing is performed at the
State Materials Laboratory, the Contractor shall arrange for transfer of the equipment to
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-107 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical the designated maintenance facility for site-specific operational testing when notified that testing is complete at the State Materials Laboratory. Prior to shipping, the Contractor shall arrange an appointment for testing at the designated testing facility.
Induction loop circuits shall be tested in accordance with Section 8-20.3(14)D. All other conductors shall be tested in accordance with this Section.
The Contractor shall conduct the following tests on all electrical circuits with nominal operating voltage between 115-volts and 600-volts, in the presence of the Engineer: 1.
Test the continuity of each circuit.

2.
Test for grounds in each circuit, which shall consist of the physical examination of the installation to ensure that all required ground jumpers, devices, and appurtenances do exist and are mechanically firm. 3.
Test the insulation of each conductor. Using a megohm meter, a 500-volt test on each new circuit between the conductor and ground with all switch boards, panel boards, fuse holders, switches, receptacles, and overcurrent devices in place. All readings shall be recorded. The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer with electronic (PDF format) copies of the test results identifying observed readings with their respective circuits.
The insulation resistance shall not be less than 50 megohms between the conductor and ground on new circuits with a total single conductor length of 2,500 feet and over, nor less than 50 megohms on new circuits with single conductor length of less than 2,500 feet.
Changes in the above stated minimum readings must be approved in writing by the
Engineer. Only those factors based on dielectric properties of conductor insulations, splicing insulations, or terminal strip castings, will be cause for consideration of a variance. 4.
Functional testing in which it is demonstrated that each and every part of the system functions as specified.
For those new circuits below 115-volts nominal, the circuits shall be tested with a 500volt megger for continuity, ground, and a test to demonstrate the circuit functions as specified. The megger test shall show an insulation resistance of not less than 2-megohms to ground for 24V DC circuits, and 8-megohms to ground for all other circuits.
A fault in materials or in any part of the installation revealed by these tests shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor in a manner approved by the Engineer, and the same test shall be repeated until no fault appears. 8-20.3(11)A
Traffic Signal System Testing

The Contractor shall provide the Engineer a minimum of 5 days advance written notice of the proposed traffic signal turn-on date and time for review and approval. System functional testing shall occur no later than the working day prior to the scheduled turnon date. The Contractor shall provide traffic control to stop all traffic from entering the intersection during testing. During testing, the Contracting Agency personnel will need to enter the intersection to verify operations of all signal displays.
Detection systems shall be tested separately before the traffic signal system functional testing date. Induction loop detection shall be in accordance with Section 8-20.3(14)D.
The Contracting Agency electronics technician will deliver and install the programmed controller and verify proper operation. At the start of testing, the Contracting Agency electronics technician will turn the traffic signal system to its flash mode to verify proper flash indications. The Contracting Agency electronics technician will then conduct functional tests to demonstrate that each part of the traffic signal system functions as specified, including running the traffic signal system for one full cycle with no traffic.
These demonstrations shall be conducted in the presence of a Contracting Agency
Page 8-108
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20 electronic technician, Inspector, the Contracting Agency electrical Inspector, and
Regional Traffic Engineer or his/her designee. Covers for signal displays and pedestrian pushbuttons shall remain installed, with indications verified through the mesh portions of the covers.
If any part of the traffic signal system fails the functional testing, the Contractor shall make repairs or replace equipment as necessary, and then submit a new turn-on date request. Functional testing will be repeated in accordance with this Section prior to the new turn-on date. 8-20.3(11)B
Traffic Signal System Turn-On
Traffic signal system turn-on shall occur no less than one working day after successful completion of functional testing in accordance with Section 8-20.3(11)A.
On the day of traffic signal system turn-on, the Contractor shall provide traffic control to stop all traffic from entering the intersection and remove the covers from all traffic signal displays and pedestrian pushbuttons. The Contracting Agency electronics technician will then turn the traffic signal to stop and go operation for no less than one full cycle.
Based on the results of the turn-on, the Engineer will direct the Contracting Agency electronics technician to either turn the traffic signal on to normal stop and go operation or to turn the signal off and require the Contractor to cover all signal displays and correct all deficiencies.
If the Contractor is directed to turn off the traffic signal, the Contractor shall schedule a new turn-on date with the Engineer in accordance with the previously mentioned procedures.
Unless approved by the Engineer no change to signal stop and go operation will be allowed between 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Monday through
Thursday, nor will signal operation changes be allowed on Fridays, weekends, holidays, or the day preceding a holiday. 8-20.3(11)C

Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) Testing
Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) systems shall be tested before and after field installation. Each UPS system shall undergo quality control testing, Contracting Agency laboratory testing, and field testing. 8-20.3(11)C1 UPS Quality Control Testing
Prior to delivery of the UPS system to the State Materials Laboratory in Tumwater, all components and equipment, including the batteries shall be fully installed in the cabinet and the UPS system operations shall be successfully tested by the Contractor’s representative. A testing certification (letter or similar) shall be provided with the cabinet.
After the UPS system has been successfully tested, the batteries shall be removed from the cabinet and the cabinet and batteries shall be delivered, independently, to the State
Materials Laboratory for pre-installation laboratory testing. 8-20.3(11)C2 UPS Laboratory Testing
The UPS system testing shall verify complete cabinet assembly and simulate UPS system operations as installed in the field. The tests shall check the operation of each individual component as well as the overall operation of the system.
Laboratory testing will consist of the following four separate stages: 1.
Delivery and Assembly 2.
Documentation 3.
Demonstration

4.
Performance Test
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-109 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical
Testing will follow in the listed order with no time gaps between stages unless mutually agreed upon by the Contractor and the State Materials Laboratory.
The Contractor shall designate a qualified representative for these tests. All communications and actions regarding testing of all equipment submitted to the State
Materials Laboratory shall be made through this representative. These communications and actions shall include, but not be limited to, all notifications of failure or rejection, demonstration of the equipment, and the return of rejected equipment.
Stage 1: Delivery and Assembly
The Contractor shall provide all Work necessary to assemble the UPS system and make ready for demonstration at the State Materials Laboratory. Upon delivery, the batteries shall be reinstalled in the cabinet and the UPS system shall be made fully operational. All components for the complete UPS system, including the necessary test equipment, shall be ready for testing within 14 calendar days of delivery to the State Materials Laboratory.
Stage 2: Documentation
All documentation shall be furnished with the UPS system equipment prior to the start of testing. The documents to be supplied shall consist of the following: 1.

Serial numbers, as applicable 2.
Wiring diagrams for all equipment in the required quantities and formats. 3.
Complete operations and maintenance manuals in the required quantities and formats. 4.
A description of the functions and the capabilities of individual components and of the overall UPS system.
Stage 3: Demonstration
The Contractor shall provide the following: 1.
A presentation on how to operate the system. 2.
A complete and thorough demonstration to show that all components of the UPS system are in good condition and operating properly.
The demonstration shall be performed by the Contractor’s representative in the presence of State Materials Laboratory personnel.
Stage 4: Performance Test
The performance test will be conducted by the State Materials Laboratory to determine if the UPS system performs correctly. The performance test will include the testing of the following specifications: 1.

Battery discharge rate. 2.
Battery recharge rate. 3.
Power transfer rate. 4.
Operational duration.
Test results for items 1-3 shall be within the manufacturer’s recommended values for the tests to be considered successful. Test 4 shall be considered successful if the system maintains the test load for the required minimum duration for the battery configuration.
Equipment failure or rejection
All component or system failures shall be documented. This documentation shall provide the following:
Page 8-110
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 1.
A detailed description of the failure. 2.
The steps undertaken to correct the failure. 3.
A list of parts that were replaced, if any. 8-20
All failed or rejected equipment shall be removed from the State Materials Laboratory within three working days following notification; otherwise, the failed or rejected equipment will be returned, freight collect, to the Contractor.
Following final approval by the State Materials Laboratory, all equipment shall be removed from the State Materials Laboratory by the Contractor and delivered to the appropriate site(s) as designated in the Contract. 8-20.3(11)C3 UPS System Field Testing
After installation, the Contractor shall field test the UPS system to ensure the system operates in accordance with Contract and manufacturer’s instructions. The test shall ensure that that all components are operational within manufacturer’s tolerances. The
Contractor shall provide a testing procedure to the Engineer for approval. The testing procedure shall provide for operational testing of the following: 1.
UPS power module. 2.
Surge suppressor.

3.
Automatic transfer switch. 4.
Generator power transfer switch.
The field test shall demonstrate the loss of utility power and the switch over to battery power without interference with the normal operation of the connected downstream cabinet. For traffic signal systems, this includes the traffic signal controller, conflict monitor, and any other peripheral devices within the traffic controller assembly. 8-20.3(12)
Painting
Application of color to a pole shall be by powder-coating. Color applied to cabinets may be by powder-coating or the use of an approved wrapping material. Painting, repair, or touchup required shall be done in conformance with applicable portions of Section 6-07.
Cabinets and poles shall not be painted unless specifically indicated in the Plans or Special
Provisions. The bottom surface of all pole base plates (faying surface), all slip base plates and hardware, and all anchor bolt hardware shall not have any color applied.
Cabinet wraps shall be vinyl (such as Polyvinyl Fluoride/PVF) and shall include an antigraffiti overlay. Wraps shall be intended for use on traffic signal and similar roadside equipment cabinets and shall not affect the thermal characteristics of the cabinet. Wraps shall be installed such that all doors, vents, and keyholes remain fully functional and unobstructed. Art for wraps shall comply with any public art requirements or restrictions of the agency that owns the cabinet upon which the wrap is being installed. 8-20.3(13)
Illumination Systems

8-20.3(13)A
Light Standards
Light standards shall be handled when loading, unloading, and erecting in such a manner that they will not be damaged. Parts that are damaged due to the Contractor’s operations shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractor’s expense.
Light standards shall not be erected on concrete foundations until foundations have set at least 72 hours or attained a compressive strength of 2,400 psi, and shall be raked sufficiently to be plumb after all load has been placed.
Slip base installation shall conform to the following:
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-111 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 1.
The slip plane shall be free of obstructions such as protruding conduit or anchor bolts. The anchor bolts, and other obstructions shall terminate at a height below the elevation of the top of the slip plate. Conduit shall extend a maximum of 1 inch above the top of the foundation, including grounding end bushing or end bell bushing.

2.
Washers in the slip plane shall be placed between the slip plate and the keeper plate. 3.
Anchor bolts shall extend through the top heavy-hex nut two full threads to the extent possible while conforming to the specified slip base clearance requirements.
Anchor bolts shall be tightened by the Turn-of-Nut Tightening Method in accordance with Sections 6-03.3(33) and 8-20.3(4). 4.
Clamping bolts shall be tightened in accordance with Sections 6-03.3(33) and 8-20.3(4). The clamping bolts shall be tightened to the specified torque, plus or minus
2 percent, in two stages using an accurately calibrated torque wrench before erecting the light standard. Except as otherwise specified, the Contractor shall install 1-inch diameter clamping bolts in all slip bases to a torque of 95 foot-pounds. 5.
The galvanized surfaces of the slip plates, the keeper plate and the luminaire base plate shall be smooth, without irregularities, to reduce friction and to prevent slackening of bolt tension due to flattening of the irregularities. 6.
Anchor bolts damaged after the foundation concrete is placed shall not be repaired by bending or welding. The Contractor’s repair procedure is to be submitted to the
Engineer for approval prior to making repairs. The procedure is to include removing the damaged portion of the anchor bolt, cutting threads on the undamaged portion to remain, the installation of an approved threaded sleeve nut and stud, and repairing the foundation with epoxy concrete. Epoxy concrete shall meet the requirements of
Section 9-26.3(1)B.

7.
The grout pad shall not extend above the elevation of the bottom of the anchor plate. 8.
Wiring for slip base installation shall conform to details in the Standard Plans.
Breakaway coupling installation shall conform to the following: 1.
At existing foundations, the anchor nuts, pole, grout pad, and leveling nuts shall be removed. Conduits shall be cut to a maximum height of 2 inches above the foundation including grounding end bushing or end bell bushing. Paint, conforming to Section 9-08.1(2)B, shall be applied to the cut conduit that has been threaded.
Anchor bolts that are damaged shall be repaired with approved sleeve nuts as noted under slip base installation procedures. 2.
At new foundations, the anchor bolts shall be installed with top of bolt 2½ to 3 inches above the foundation. New anchor bolts may not be cut and shall be verified plumb and at the correct height prior to pouring concrete. Where existing anchor bolts are designated to be re-used, the existing anchor bolts shall be cut off 2½ to 3 inches above the foundation if they extend more than 4 inches above the foundation. The cut surface shall be painted with two coats of galvanizing repair paint in accordance with Section 9-08. 3.
Couplings shall be installed to within ⅛ to ⅜ inch of the foundation. Couplings shall then be leveled. 4.
The pole shall be set and plumbed; and washers, nuts, and skirt installed per manufacturer’s recommendations. 5.
The conduit installed in a luminaire foundation shall not exceed 1 inch, trade size.

Slip base insert installations shall conform to details in the Standard Plans, and shall conform to items 1 through 8 above for slip base installation, except that the specified torque for the ⅞-inch diameter clamping bolts shall be 50 foot-pounds.
Page 8-112
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20
Prior to installation all relocated metal light standards shall have existing painted identification markings removed. Manufactures Identification tag shall not be removed.
Damaged surfaces and coatings shall be repaired with material matching the existing coating.
All new light standards shall have an approved metal tag riveted to the pole above the handhole. The information provided on the tag shall be as noted on the preapproved drawings.
All new and relocated metal light standards shall be numbered for identification using painted 4 inch block gothic letters (similar to series C highway lettering) and numbers installed 3 feet above the base facing the Traveled Way. Paint shall be black enamel alkyd gloss conforming to Federal Specification TT-E-489. Labels shall be as shown in the
Standard Plans.
In setting timber poles, the Contractor shall provide a minimum burial of 10 percent of the total pole length plus 2 feet, or 6 feet for poles that are 30 feet or shorter, and shall rake the poles as shown in the Plans. 8-20.3(13)B

Vacant 8-20.3(13)C
Luminaires
The Contractor shall mark the installation date on the inside of the luminaire ballast or driver housing using a permanent marking pen.
All luminaires shall be mounted level, both transverse and longitudinally, as measured across points specified by the manufacturer. Leveling and orientation shall be accomplished after pole plumbing. 8-20.3(14)
Signal Systems 8-20.3(14)A
Signal Controllers
All control cabinets and control equipment shall be factory wired ready for operation.
Field work will be limited to placing cabinets and equipment and connecting the field wiring to field terminal strips. All controller cabinets shall be installed on a silicone seal pad.
Controllers for portable traffic signal systems shall conform to the requirements of
Section 9-29.13(7). 8-20.3(14)B

Signal Heads
Unless ordered otherwise by the Engineer, signal heads shall not be installed until all other signal equipment is installed and the controller is in place, inspected, and ready for operation at that intersection, except that the signal heads may be mounted if the faces are covered to clearly indicate the signal is not in operation.
Three section displays mounted on type M mounts shall have the plumbizer between the top and second display. Four and five section vertical displays mounted on type M mounts shall have the plumbizer between the second and third display. 8-20.3(14)C
Induction Loop Vehicle Detectors
Induction loops shall be constructed as detailed in the Contract and the following: 1.
Loop wire shall conform to Section 9-29.3. 2.
Lead-in cable shall conform to Section 9-29.3. 3.
All loops shall be installed after grinding or prior to paving the final lift of asphalt designated in the Contract. Loop conductors shall be held at the bottom of the saw cut by high temperature backer rod (sized to fit snugly in the saw cut). Twoinch-long pieces of the backer rod shall be installed on 24-inch centers along the
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-113 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical entire loop and home run(s) and at the entrance and exit of all turns greater than
45 degrees. When a new loop is installed in the same location as an existing loop, the existing loop shall be removed by grinding deep enough to destroy the existing loop conductors. Where the bid item “Planing Bituminous Pavement” is not included in the Contract, removal of existing loops shall be included in the bid item for new loop installation unless otherwise specified in the Contract. 4.
Each loop shall be the size and number of turns indicated in the Plans. 5.
No loop installation will be done in rainy weather or when the pavement is wet. 6.
All sawcuts shall be cleaned with a high-pressure washer and dried with 100 psi minimum air pressure, to the satisfaction of the Engineer. If traffic is allowed over the sawcut prior to wire installation, the sawcuts shall be cleaned again. 7.
Wiring shall be installed with a blunt-nosed wooden wedge. 8.
Prior to the installation of the high temperature backer rod all slack shall be removed from the wiring. Kinks in wiring or folding back of excess wiring will not be allowed. 9.
High temperature backer rod, sized for snug fit shall be installed in the saw cut on 2-foot centers and at all sharp turns. 10. Install sealant as per Contract or as approved by the Engineer. 11. Sealant shall be applied such that air bubbles or foam will not be trapped in the sawcut. 8-20.3(14)D
Test for Induction Loops and Lead-In Cable

All tests shall be performed by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer for each loop. All costs associated with testing shall be included in the unit Contract prices of the respective Bid items. Tests are defined as follows:
Test A – DC resistance between the two lead-in cable wires, as measured by a volt ohmmeter. The resistance shall not exceed 10 ohms.
Test B – DC resistance test between the lead-in cable shield and ground, using a megohm meter at 500 volts DC. The resistance shall equal or exceed 100 megohms.
Test C – DC resistance test between the loop circuit and ground using a megohm meter at 500 volts DC. The resistance shall equal or exceed 100-megohms.
Test D – Inductance test of the loop circuit. Type 1 loops, Type 2, and Type 3 loops connected in series shall have a minimum inductance of 150 microhenries. Single and parallel spliced Type 2 and Type 3 loops shall have a minimum inductance of 75 microhenries.
The results of all tests shall be recorded and provided to the Engineer.
Testing shall be performed as follows: 1.
Loop Wire Testing. Tests A, C, and D shall be performed on each loop wire before connecting it to any other wiring or terminal. 2.
Lead-In Cable Testing. Tests A, B, and C shall be performed on the loop lead-in cable before connecting it to any other wiring or terminal. Test C shall be performed on each wire in the cable. 3.
Splice and Connection Testing. Tests A, B, C, and D shall be performed on the entire loop wire and lead-in cable system, at the controller cabinet, after all splices and connections are made but with the lead-in cable disconnected from the controller cabinet terminals.

When a test fails, the Contractor shall repair or replace the faulty component(s) and perform all applicable tests again.
Page 8-114
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20
Where new loops are to be installed and connected to existing loop lead-in cable, the existing loop lead-in cable shall be tested in accordance with Item 2, Lead-In Cable
Testing, above. Failure of any test requires replacement of the loop lead-in cable. Work to replace the existing lead-in cable shall be paid in accordance with Section 1-04.4. 8-20.3(14)E
Signal Standards
Traffic signal standards shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the methods and materials noted in the Contract and the following requirements: 1.
All dimensions and orientations will be field verified by the Engineer prior to fabrication. 2.
The signal standard component identification shall conform to details in the Plans.

3.
Disconnect connectors complete with pole and bracket cable shall be installed in any signal standard supporting a luminaire. Illumination wiring installation shall conform to details in the Plans for slip base wiring. 4.
Mast arms may be field drilled to support the installation of any required pre-emption equipment, camera wiring, detector wiring, or type “N” signal mountings. The maximum diameter shall be 1 inch. No other field drilling of mast arms is allowed. 5.
All pole entrances required for pole-mounted signal heads, cabinets, signs, or pedestrian pushbutton assemblies shall be field drilled. 6.
Damage to the galvanized pole surface resulting from field drilling shall be repaired with approved zinc rich paint. 7.
Field welding will not be allowed, except as shown in the Plans. 8.
All tenons shall be factory installed. 9.
All welding shall be completed prior to galvanizing. 10. Foundations shall be constructed to provide the pole orientation noted in the Plans.
Anchor bolts shall be tightened in accordance with Sections 6-03.3(33) and 8-20.3(4). 11. Slip base installation for Type RM and FB signal standards shall conform to the slip base installation requirements specified in Section 8-20.3(13)A, except that the specified torque for the ¾-inch diameter clamping bolts shall be 50 foot-pounds. 12. The pole shall be plumbed after signal heads are installed. 13. The space between the bottom base plate and the top of foundation shall be filled with grout with a ⅜-inch plastic drain tube.
Signal standards shall not be erected on concrete foundations until the foundations have attained 2,400 psi or 14 days after concrete placement. Signal standards without mast arms may be erected after 72 hours. Type IV and V strain pole standards may be erected but the messenger cable (span wire) shall not be placed until the foundation has attained
2400 psi or 14 days after concrete placement.
Signal supports used with portable traffic signal systems shall provide a minimum of two signal displays, spaced a minimum of 8 feet apart.
When portable traffic signals are used to provide alternating one-way control, a minimum of one of the signal displays shall be suspended over the Traveled Way. The minimum vertical clearance to the Traveled Way for this signal display is 16′ 6″.
Timber strain poles shall be set a burial depth of 10 percent of the total length plus 2 feet and shall be raked as noted in the Plans.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-115 8-20
Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20.3(15)
Grout
Grout shall conform to the requirements of Section 6-02.3(20) and 9-20.3(4). 8-20.3(16)
Reinstalling Salvaged Material
When the Contract requires salvaged electrical equipment to be reinstalled, the
Contractor shall furnish and install all necessary materials and equipment, including anchor bolts, nuts, washers, concrete, etc., required to install the salvaged equipment.
Removed anchor bolts, connecting bolts, nuts, and washers shall not be re-used. 8-20.3(17)

“As Built” Plans
Upon Physical Completion of the Work, the Contractor shall submit corrected shop drawings, schematic circuit diagrams, or other drawings necessary for the Engineer to prepare corrected Plans to show the Work as constructed.
These drawings shall be on sheets conforming in size to the provisions of Section 1-05.3. 8-20.4
Measurement
Conduit of the kind and diameter specified will be measured, through the junction boxes, by the linear foot of conduit placed, unless the conduit is included in an illumination system, signal system, intelligent transportation system, or other type of electrical system lump sum Bid item.
Casing will be measured by the linear foot for the actual length of casing placed, unless the casing is included in an illumination, signal, or other electrical system lump sum
Bid item.
Directional boring will be measured by the linear foot for the length of the boring tunnel. 8-20.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Illumination System ____”, lump sum. “Traffic Signal System ____”, lump sum. “ITS ____”, lump sum.
The lump sum Contract price for “Illumination System, ____”, “Traffic Signal System ____”, or “ITS _____” shall be full pay for the construction of the complete electrical system, modifying existing systems, or both, including sign lighting systems, as described above and as shown in the Plans, and herein specified, including excavation, backfilling, concrete foundations, conduit, wiring, restoring facilities destroyed or damaged during construction, salvaging existing materials, and for making all required tests. All additional materials and labor, not shown in the Plans or called for herein and which are required to complete the electrical system, shall be included in the lump sum Contract price. “Conduit Pipe ____ In. Diam.”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Conduit Pipe____ In. Diam.” shall be full pay for furnishing all pipe, pipe connections, elbows, bends, caps, reducers, conduits, unions, junction boxes, and fittings; for placing the pipe in accordance with the above provisions, including all excavation, jacking, or drilling required, backfilling of any voids around casing, conduits, pits, or trenches; restoration of native vegetation disturbed by the operation, chipping of pavement, and bedding of the pipe; and all other Work necessary for the construction of the conduit, except that when conduit is included on any project as an integral part of an illumination, traffic signal, or ITS system, and the conduit is not shown as a pay item, it shall be included in the lump sum price for the system shown.
Page 8-116

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Illumination, Traffic Signal Systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Electrical 8-20
All costs for installing conduit containing both signal and illumination wiring shall be included in the Contract prices for the signal system.
All costs for installing junction boxes containing both illumination and signal wiring shall be included in the Contract prices for the signal system. “Casing”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear feet for “casing” shall be full payment for boring, jacking or drilling for installing casing, and backfilling any voids around the casing and pits or back filling of the trenches required to install the casing. This cost will also include any restoration of native vegetation disturbed by the operation. “Directional Boring”, per linear foot
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Directional Boring”, shall be full pay for furnishing all labor, materials, equipment and electrical supervision associated with the directional boring, except that when directional boring is included on any project as an integral part of an illumination, traffic signal, or ITS system, and the directional boring is not shown as a pay item, it shall be included in the lump sum price for the system shown.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-117 8-21
Permanent Signing

8-21 8-21.1
Description
This Work consists of furnishing and installing permanent signing, sign removal, sign relocation, and refacing existing signs in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, and at the locations shown in the Plans or where designated by the Engineer. 8-21.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Roadside Sign Structures
Permanent Signs
Sign Support Structures
Temporary Casing
Synthetic Slurry
Water Slurry

9-06.16 9-28 9-28.14 9-36.1(2) 9-36.2(2) 9-36.2(3)
The Contractor shall submit a Manufacturer’s Certificate of Compliance for all permanent signs in accordance with Section 1-06.3; a copy of the Manufacturer’s Certificate of
Compliance shall be available at the fabricator’s plant. Permanent signs will be inspected at the fabricator’s plant prior to shipment to the project unless otherwise accepted by the
Engineer. Signs without an approved decal will not be installed on the project with the exception of double-faced signs which do not receive decals or fabricator’s stickers. 8-21.3 8-21.3(1)
Construction Requirements
Location of Signs
Signs are located in the Plans by station numbers. These are tentative locations subject to change by the Engineer. The post lengths specified in the Plans are estimated for Bid purposes only. Final lengths of timber posts will be determined or verified by the Engineer at the request of the Contractor prior to fabrication. Final lengths of steel posts will be determined by the Engineer prior to fabrication. 8-21.3(2)
Placement of Signs
All reflectorized signs located less than 30 feet from the edge of the lane should be turned out approximately 3 degrees from the pavement edge of oncoming traffic lanes, and those located 30 feet or more from the edge of the lane should be turned in approximately 3 degrees from the pavement edge of oncoming traffic lanes. All sign posts shall be plumb and signs level. The signs shall be inspected at night by the Engineer and, if specular glare occurs from failure to install at 3 degrees as stipulated, the Contractor shall reinstall the signs at no expense to the Contracting Agency. The post holes shall be of sufficient dimensions to allow placement and thorough compaction of selected backfill material completely around the post. Selected backfill material shall consist of earth or fine sandy gravel free from organic matter with no individual particles exceeding 1½ inches in diameter. 8-21.3(3)
Sign Covering

When notified by the Engineer, the Contractor shall cover or uncover certain signs to facilitate and control the operation of the project. The covering shall consist of 4 mils minimum thickness black polyethylene sheeting of sufficient size to entirely cover the sign, unless otherwise approved by the Engineer, and shall extend over the edges of the sign and fastened on the back. The Contractor shall not use adhesive tapes on the face of the signs. Other methods of covering may be considered if approved by the Engineer.
Page 8-118
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10 Permanent Signing 8-21.3(4) 8-21
Sign Removal
Where shown in the Plans or ordered by the Engineer, the existing signs and, if so indicated, the sign Structures shall be removed by the Contractor.
Sign Structures shall include sign bridges, cantilever sign Structures, bridge-mounted sign brackets, and all other sign-mounting Structure shown in the Plans to be removed by the
Contractor.
The embedded anchors attaching signs and sign Structures specified for removal to existing concrete Structures shall be removed a minimum of 1 inch beneath the existing concrete surface. The void left by removal of the embedded anchors shall be coated with epoxy bonding agent and filled with mortar conforming to Section 9-20.4(2). The epoxy bonding agent shall be Type II, conforming to Section 9-26.1, with the grade and class as recommended by the epoxy bonding agent manufacturer and as approved by the
Engineer. The mortar shall consist of cement and fine aggregate mixed in the proportions to match the color of the existing concrete surface as near as practicable.
Where indicated, the Contractor shall remove concrete pedestals to a minimum of 2 feet below Subgrade or finished ground elevation and backfill the hole to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Where an existing sign post is located within a sidewalk area, the Contractor shall remove the post and finish the area so as to make the sidewalk continuous. Where signs are removed from existing overhead sign Structures, the existing vertical sign support braces shall also be removed. The removed aluminum signs, wood signs, wood sign posts, wood structures, metal sign posts, wind beams, and other metal structural members and all the existing fastening hardware connecting such members shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the project. Salvage value of the removed signs and sign Structure members shall be reflected in the Contractor’s Bid price for other items of Work. 8-21.3(5)

Sign Relocation
Where shown in the Plans, the existing signs and, if so indicated, the sign Structures shall be relocated by the Contractor to the location noted. Where the existing sign Structure is mounted on concrete pedestals, the Contractor shall remove the pedestal to a minimum of 2 feet below finished grade and backfill the remaining hole with material similar to that surrounding the hole. When the existing Structure is to be relocated, the Contractor shall provide all necessary materials, labor and hardware to erect and provide an operable unit.
All materials damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced at no cost to the Contracting
Agency. Unless otherwise allowed relocation of each existing sign and Structure shall be accomplished during the day in which it was removed. Relocation of overhead signs and
Structures shall be accomplished during the hours between 12 midnight and 4:00 a.m. or as approved by the Engineer. 8-21.3(6)
Sign Refacing
Where indicated in the Plans or in the Special Provisions, the Contractor shall reface existing signs with sheet aluminum overlay panels. Unless otherwise indicated in the Plans or allowed by the Engineer, all Work shall be accomplished while the existing sign is in place. Modifications to each sign shall be completed during the same day in which the
Work is commenced.
Prior to the installation of overlay panels, the existing legend (message and border) shall be removed. The aluminum overlay panels shall be butt jointed. Aluminum or stainless steel screws, a minimum of ½ inch in length, shall be used to attach overlay panels to existing plywood signs. In addition to the screws, two ¼-inch diameter by 1-inch-long aluminum or stainless steel bolts shall be installed through the top of each panel and the plywood sign. Aluminum blind rivets shall be used to attach overlay panels to existing aluminum signs. Screws or rivets shall be installed at 24-inch centers. Unless otherwise noted, sign background material shall be in accordance with Section 9-28.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 8-119 8-21
Permanent Signing
After installation of overlay panels, the existing legend shall be reinstalled or, where indicated in the Plans, new legend or portions thereof shall be furnished and installed by the Contractor. Direct applied legend shall be applied to the new face prior to resurfacing.
Layout and letter spacing shall be in accordance with Contracting Agency standards unless otherwise approved by the Engineer. New legend components shall be of the same type and size as the existing materials, and it shall be the Contractor’s responsibility to verify material type and size. Materials damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced at no expense to the Contracting Agency. 8-21.3(7)
Sign Message Revision
Where indicated in the Plans or in the Special Provisions, the Contractor shall revise existing sign messages or layouts. The Contractor shall remove and reinstall portions of or all of the existing message or furnish and install new message components as necessary to provide the revised message as indicated. Prior to installing the revised message, the Contractor shall thoroughly clean the sign face and plug all existing rivet holes with aluminum blind rivets painted the same color as the area immediately surrounding the rivet head, with the exception that rivet heads in the white colored sign areas shall be coated to match the white color or be uncoated rivet heads. Plugging screw holes in plywood signs will not be required. Modifications to the sign shall be completed during the same day in which Work is commenced and while the sign is in place. All new materials necessary to accomplish this Work shall be the same type and size as the existing components, and it shall be the Contractor’s responsibility to verify such component type and size. Materials damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced at no expense to the Contracting Agency. Existing materials not reinstalled shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the project. 8-21.3(8)
Sign Cleaning
Signs shall be cleaned after relocation or installation to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
The Contractor shall not use cleaning solvents that would be harmful to the sign finish. 8-21.3(9)

Sign Structures 8-21.3(9)A
Fabrication of Steel Structures
Fabrication shall conform to the applicable requirements of Sections 6-03 and 9-06.
All welded connections of sign bridge and cantilever sign Structure posts, arms, and beams, including base and connection plates, shall be cleaned prior to welding to remove all mill scale from within 2 inches of the weld. As an alternative to the blast cleaning requirements of Section 6-03.3(13), the Contractor may perform the cleaning using power hand tools as approved by the Engineer. Unless otherwise specified in the Plans or Special
Provisions, metal surfaces shall not be painted.
All fabrication, including repairs, adjustments or modifications of previously fabricated sign structure members and connection elements, shall be performed in the shop, under a Working Drawing prepared and submitted by the Contractor for the original fabrication or the specific repair, adjustment or modification. Sign structure fabrication repair, adjustment or modification of any kind in the field is not permitted. If fabrication repair, adjustment or modification occurs after a sign structure member or connection element has been galvanized, the entire member or element shall be re-galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M 111. 8-21.3(9)A1
Fabrication of Monotube Sign Bridges and Cantilever Sign Structures
The fabricator shop will provide a Certified Welding Inspector. The inspector shall be a
AWS Certified Welding Inspector (CWI) qualified and certified in accordance with the provisions of AWS QCI Standard for Qualification and Certification.
Page 8-120

2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Permanent Signing 8-21
Welds shall be inspected as follows: 1.
Visual Inspection in accordance with Section 6-03.3(25)A1. 2.
Magnetic Particle Inspection in accordance with Section 6-03.3(25)A4. 3.
Ultrasonic Inspection in accordance with Section 6-03.3(25)A3. 4.
Dye-Penetrant or Magnetic Particle Inspection
The post to beam connection weld shall have 100 percent of its length inspected using dye-penetrant or magnetic-particle testing techniques. The inspection shall be performed after the root pass and after completion of the weld.
All bolted connections shall be made using the direct tension indicator method in accordance with Section 6-03.3(33). Splice connections made using the direct tension indicator method are not required to be inspected in accordance with Section 6-03.3(33)B and will be accepted based on feeler gauge measurements conforming to
Table 3 in Section 6-03.3(33).
All bolted connection faying surfaces shall be flat after fabrication as required to provide a solid fit upon assembly in accordance with Section 6-03.3(33). The flatness of the faying surfaces shall be flat to within a tolerance of 1/32 inch in 12 inches and a tolerance of 1/16 inch overall. Base plates with leveling nuts shall be flat to within a tolerance of 1/8 inch in 12 inches and a tolerance of 3/16 inch overall.
In order to achieve the flatness requirements, the Contractor may need to mill or machine the plates. The Contractor shall increase plate thicknesses as needed to ensure the remaining section meets the specified thickness after such machining or milling.
At bolted connections, both faying surfaces shall be at right angles to the bolt axis, parallel to each other, and shall be in full contact in the assembled condition. Full contact is defined as 90-percent of the outside and inside perimeters of the splice plates being visually in contact. The outside surface shall be inspected just inside the shell of the monotube and the inside shall be inspected at the handhole. Splices shall be fabricated such that the required camber remains continuous and smooth across the field splice.
Prior to galvanizing, the Contractor shall shop assemble the completed Structure lying on its side in an undeflected position to ensure correct alignment, accuracy of holes, fit of joints, smooth camber profile, and the specified amount of camber. The joints shall be bolted with a sufficient number of bolts tightened snug tight to close the joints in full contact as they would be in the final field assembled position as defined above. The
Contractor shall not disassemble the sign structure for galvanizing as specified until receiving the Engineer’s acceptance of the shop assembled structure.
All galvanized surfaces exposed to view after erection shall be shop painted or shop powder coated in accordance with Section 6-07.3(11), except when the Plans or
Special Provisions require field painting only in accordance with Sections 6-07.3(9)I and 6-07.3(11)A. Contact surfaces of the field bolted connections shall be left as galvanized without an overcoat.
Unless otherwise specified in the Special Provisions the color of the finish coat shall match SAE AMS Standard 595 color number 35237 when dry.
All galvanized surfaces specified to be painted or powder coated shall be prepared for coating in accordance with Section 6-07.3(11).
After completing erection, the Contractor shall repair all metal surfaces with damaged paint or powder coatings and exposed metal with a field repair coating in accordance with
Section 6-07.3(9)I and Section 6-07.3(11)A (for paint) or Section 6-07.3(11)B (for powder coating). The color of the finish coat of the field repair coating, when dry, shall match the color specified above.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-121 8-21
Permanent Signing
The Contractor shall furnish and install the vibration damper as shown in the Plans. The damper shall be installed before the sign structure is erected. 8-21.3(9)B
Erection of Steel Structures
Erection shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section 8-21.3(9)F. Before erecting steel Structures, the Contractor shall submit an erection plan as a Type 2
Working Drawing. The erection plan shall provide complete details of the erection process including at a minimum: 1.
Procedure and sequence of operation; 2.
Structure weights, lift points, and rigging devices;

3.
Crane(s) make and model, weight, geometry, lift capacity, outrigger size and reactions; 4.
Locations of cranes, trucks delivering structures, and the location of cranes and outriggers relative to other Structures, including retaining walls and wing walls.
Section 8-21.3(9)F notwithstanding, the Contractor may erect a sign bridge prior to completion of the shaft cap portion of one foundation for one post provided the following conditions are satisfied: 1.
The Contractor shall submit a Type 2E Working Drawing consisting of design calculations and details of the temporary supports and falsework supporting the sign bridge near the location of the incomplete foundation. The submittal shall include the method of releasing and removing the temporary supports and falsework without inducing loads and stress into the sign bridge. 2.
The Contractor shall submit a Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of the method used to secure the anchor bolt array in proper position with the sign bridge while casting the shaft cap concrete to complete the foundation.
The Contractor shall erect the sign bridge and temporary supports and falsework, complete the remaining portion of the incomplete foundation, and remove the temporary supports and falsework, in accordance with the accepted Working
Drawings. 8-21.3(9)C
Timber Posts
Timber sign posts shall conform to the requirements of Section 9-28.14(1). 8-21.3(9)D

Aluminum Structures
Welding of aluminum shall be in accordance with Section 9-28.14(3). 8-21.3(9)E
Bridge Mounted Sign Brackets
The Contractor shall fabricate and install sign supports for mounting signs on bridge
Structures at the locations and as shown in the Plans, including inserts and anchor bolts. Fabrication and installation shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of
Sections 6-03 and 9-06. Metal surfaces shall not be painted.
The quantity of structural carbon steel shown in the Contract is listed only for the convenience of the Contractor in determining the volume of Work involved and is not guaranteed to be accurate. The prospective Bidders shall verify this quantity before submitting a Bid. No adjustments other than for approved changes will be made in the lump sum Contract price for the bridge mounted sign brackets, even though the actual quantity of structural carbon steel required may deviate from that listed. 8-21.3(9)F
Foundations
The excavation and backfill shall conform to the requirements of Section 2-09.3. Where obstructions prevent construction of planned foundations, the Contractor shall construct an effective foundation satisfactory to the Engineer.
Page 8-122

2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Permanent Signing 8-21
The bottom of concrete foundations shall rest on firm ground. If the portion of the foundation beneath the existing ground line is formed or cased instead of being cast against the existing soil forming the sides of the excavation, then all gaps between the existing soil and the completed foundation shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with Section 2-09.3(1)E.
Concrete placed into an excavation where water is present shall be placed using an approved tremie. If water is not present, the concrete shall be placed such that the freefall is vertical down the center of the shaft without hitting the sides, the steel reinforcing bars, or the steel reinforcing bar cage bracing. The Section 6-02.3(6) restriction for 5-feet
Foundations shall be cast in one operation where practicable. The exposed portions shall be formed to present a neat appearance. Class 2 surface finish shall be applied to exposed surfaces of concrete in accordance with the requirements of Section 6-02.3(14)B.
Where soil conditions are poor, the Engineer may order the Contractor to extend the foundations shown in the Plans to provide additional depth. Such additional work shall be paid for according to Section 1-04.4.
Forms shall be true to line and grade. Tops of foundations for roadside sign structures shall be finished to ground line unless otherwise shown in the Plans or directed by the
Engineer. Tops of foundations for sign bridges and cantilever sign structures shall be finished to the elevation shown in the Plans.
Both forms and ground that will be in contact with the concrete shall be thoroughly moistened before placing concrete; however, excess water in the foundation excavation will not be permitted. Forms shall not be removed until the concrete has set at least 3 days. All forms shall be removed, except when the Plans or Special Provisions specifically allow or require the forms or casing to remain.
Foundation concrete shall conform to the requirements for the specified class, be cast-inplace concrete, and be constructed in accordance with Sections 6-02.2 and 6-02.3.
After construction of concrete foundations for sign bridge and cantilever sign structures, the Contractor shall survey the foundation locations and elevations, the anchor bolt array locations and lengths of exposed threads. The Contractor shall confirm that the survey conforms to the sign structure post, beam, span and foundation design geometry shown in the Plans prior to completion of the sign structure foundation and shall identify all deviations from the design geometry shown in the Plans. When deviations are identified, the Contractor shall notify the Engineer and submit a Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of the Contractor’s proposed method(s) of addressing the deviations.
Sign structures shall not be erected on concrete foundations until the Contractor confirms that the foundations and the fabricated sign structures are either compatible with each other and the design geometry shown in the Plans or have been modified in accordance with this section and as accepted by the Engineer to be compatible with each other, and the foundations have attained a compressive strength of 2,400-psi.
In addition to the basic requirements, sign bridges and cantilever sign structures shall be installed in accordance with the following: 1.

Foundation excavations shall conform to the requirements of Section 2-09.3(3). 2.
Tops of foundations for sign bridges and cantilever sign structures shall be finished to the elevation shown in the Plans. 3.
Steel reinforcing bars shall conform to Section 9-07. 4. the shaft cap (the portion containing the anchor bolt array assemblies above the
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-123 8-21
Permanent Signing 5.
All bolts and anchor bolts shall be installed so that two full threads extend beyond the top of the top heavy-hex nut. Anchor bolts shall be installed plumb, plus or minus
1 degree. 6.
Plumbing of sign bridges and cantilever sign structures shall be accomplished by adjusting leveling nuts. Shims or other similar devices for plumbing or raking will not be permitted.

7.
The top heavy-hex nuts of sign bridges and cantilever sign structures shall be tightened in accordance with Section 6-03.3(33), and by the Turn-of-Nut Method to a minimum rotation of ¼ turn and a maximum of ⅓ turn past snug tight. Permanent marks shall be set on the base plate and nuts to indicate nut rotation past snug tight.
In addition to the basic requirements, roadside sign structures shall be installed in accordance with the following: 1.
Tops of foundations shall be finished to final ground line unless otherwise shown in the Plans or staked by the Engineer. 2.
Steel reinforcement, including spiral reinforcing, shall conform to Section 9-07.2. 3. concrete for roadside sign structures does not require air entrainment. 4.
The assembly and installation of all Type TP-A or Type TP-B bases for roadside sign structures shall be supervised at all times by either a manufacturer’s representative or an installer who has been trained and certified by the manufacturer of the system. If the supervision is provided by a trained installer, a copy of the installer’s certification shall be provided to the Engineer prior to installation. 5.
For all Type TP-A or TP-B bases, the Contractor shall attach four female anchors to a flat rigid template following the manufacturer’s recommendations. The Contractor shall lower the anchor assembly into fresh concrete foundation and vibrate into position such that the tops of the anchor washers are flush with the finished top surface of the foundation. The Contractor shall support the template such that all anchors are level and in their proper position.
Slip base and hinge connection nuts of roadside sign structures shall be tightened using a torque wrench to the torque, following the procedure specified in the Plans. 8-21.3(9)F1
Shafts for Monotube Sign Bridge and Cantilever Sign Structure
Foundations

Shafts for monotube sign bridge and cantilever sign structure foundations shall be constructed in accordance with Section 6-19.3, except as follows:
The tolerance for placing the center at the top of the shaft under Section 6-19.3(1)A is revised for sign bridge and cantilever sign structure shafts to be within four-inches of the Plan location.
Non-destructive testing of shafts under Sections 6-19.3(1)B and 6-19.3(9) and associated Work under Section 6-19.3(6) does not apply.
Temporary casing shall be advanced during excavation operations within the limits of temporary casing shown in the Plans for all shaft locations specified in the Special
Provisions as requiring temporary casing. Excavation in advance of the casing tip shall not exceed 3-feet, except in no case shall shaft excavation and casing placement extend below the bottom of shaft excavation as shown in the Plans. Unless partial depth temporary casing is shown in the Plans, temporary casing shall be full depth of the shaft.
When the rate of advance of the excavation to the design tip elevation is significantly reduced relative to previous rate of excavation advance in the same geological unit,
Page 8-124
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Permanent Signing 8-21 then the Contractor shall remove, break-up, or push aside, the obstruction under the provisions of Section 8-21.5.
Slurry, if used, shall be synthetic slurry or water slurry as specified in Sections 9-36.2(2) and 9-36.2(3), respectively.
The concrete cover dimensions under Section 6-19.3(5)C are revised for sign bridge and cantilever sign structure shafts to be 3-inches minimum for shafts of diameters of 3-feet or less, and 4-inches minimum for shafts with diameters greater than 3-feet.
All temporary casing shall be completely removed. 8-21.3(9)G

Sign Structure Identification Information
Whenever existing bridge-mounted sign brackets, cantilever sign structures, or sign bridge structures are removed from their anchorage, whether temporary or permanent, the
Contractor shall provide the sign structure identification information, attached to the sign structures, to the Engineer. The identification information may be in the form of a riveted plate, sticker, or other means. 8-21.3(10)
Sign Attachment
Sign panels consisting of sheet aluminum or fiberglass reinforced plastic shall be attached or mounted to signposts or sign structures as shown in the Plans.
Signs not conforming to the above, including all variable message sign (VMS) assemblies and other message boardtype assemblies, shall be attached or mounted to signposts or sign structures by means of positive connections—defined as through-bolted connections.
The use of clips or clamps to accomplish the attachment or mounting of such signs and assemblies is prohibited. 8-21.3(11)
Multiple Panel Signs
After installation of multiple panel signs, the Contractor shall furnish and install an approved reinforced aluminized tape on the reverse side of the sign to prevent visible light through the seam. The tape shall be pressure sensitive and a minimum of 2 inches wide and 2 mils thick. In lieu of tape, the Contractor may use 1-inch-wide aluminum sheeting riveted to the sign back. The aluminum shall be a minimum of 0.032 inch thick. Rivet heads shall match the sign color area immediately surrounding the rivet head, with the exception that rivet heads in white colored sign areas shall be coated to match the white color or be uncoated rivet heads. 8-21.3(12)
Steel Sign Posts

For roadside sign structures on Type TP-A or Type TP-B bases, the Contractor shall use the following procedures and manufacturer’s recommendations: 1.
The couplings, special bolts, bracket bolts, and hinge connection nuts on all Type TP-A or Type TP-B bases shall be tightened using the Turn-of-Nut Tightening Method to a maximum rotation of ½ turn past snug tight. 2.
The Contractor shall shim as necessary to plumb the steel signposts.
For roadside sign structures on all Type PL and SB slip bases, the Contractor shall use the following procedures: 1.
The Contractor shall assemble the steel signpost to stub post with bolts and flat washers as shown in the Plans. 2.
Each bolt shall be tightened using a torque wrench to the torque, following the procedures specified in the Plans.
For roadside sign structures on SB-1, SB-2, or SB-3 slip bases, the Contractor shall use the following procedures and manufacturer’s recommendations:
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-125

8-21
Permanent Signing 1.
The Contractor shall attach the perforated square steel post or solid square steel post to the upper slip plate with bolts, nuts, and washers as shown in the Plans. 2.
The three bolts connecting the upper and lower slip plates shall be tightened to torque, using a torque wrench, following the procedures in the Plans.
For roadside structures on ST-2 and ST-4 sign supports, the Contractor shall use the following procedures: 1.
The Contractor shall attach the perforated square steel post to the lower sign post support with bolts, nuts, and washers as shown in the Plans. 8-21.4
Measurement
Sign covering will be measured in square feet of the area of the sign covered. 8-21.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Permanent Signing”, lump sum. “Sign Bridge No. ____”, lump sum. “Cantilever Sign Structure No. ____”, lump sum.
All costs in connection with surveying completed concrete foundations for sign bridges and cantilever sign structures shall be included in the lump sum contract price for “Structure Surveying”, except that when no Bid item is included in the Proposal for “Structure Surveying” then such costs shall be included in the lump sum contract price(s) for “Sign Bridge No. ___” and “Cantilever Sign Structure No. ___”. “Bridge Mounted Sign Bracket No. ____”, lump sum. “Sign Covering”, per square foot. “Removing Sign Structure Shaft Obstructions”, estimated.
Payment for removing obstructions, as defined in Section 8-21.3(9)F1, will be made for the changes in shaft construction methods necessary to remove the obstruction.
The Contractor and the Engineer shall evaluate the effort made and reach agreement on the equipment and employees utilized, and the number of hours involved for each.
Once these cost items and their duration have been agreed upon, the payment amount will be determined using the rate and markup methods specified in Section 1-09.6. For the purpose of providing a common Proposal for all bidders, the Contracting Agency has entered an amount for the item “Removing Sign Structure Shaft Obstructions” in the bid Proposal to become a part of the total bid by the Contractor.
If the shaft construction equipment is idled as a result of the obstruction removal work and cannot be reasonably reassigned within the project, then standby payment for the idled equipment will be added to the payment calculations. If labor is idled as a result of the obstruction removal work and cannot be reasonably reassigned within the project, then all labor costs resulting from Contractor labor agreements and established Contractor policies will be added to the payment calculations.
The Contractor shall perform the amount of obstruction work estimated by the
Contracting Agency within the original time of the contract. The Engineer will consider a time adjustment and additional compensation for costs related to the extended duration of the shaft construction operations, provided: 1.

the dollar amount estimated by the Contracting Agency has been exceeded, and 2. the Contractor shows that the obstruction removal work represents a delay to the completion of the project based on the current progress schedule provided in accordance with Section 1-08.3.
Page 8-126
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Pavement Marking 8-22 8-22.1 8-22
Pavement Marking
Description
This Work consists of furnishing, installing, and removing pavement markings upon the
Roadway surface in accordance with the Plans, Standard Plans, the FHWA publication
Standard Alphabet for Highway Signs and Pavement Markings and these Specifications, at locations shown in the Contract or as ordered by the Engineer in accordance with
Section 1-04.4.
Pavement Markings may be either Longitudinal (long) Line Markings or Transverse
Markings. Longitudinal line markings are generally placed parallel and adjacent to the flow of traffic. Transverse markings are generally placed perpendicular and across the flow of traffic. Word and symbol markings are classified as transverse markings. Traffic letters used in word messages shall be sized as shown in the Plans. 8-22.2

Materials
Material for pavement marking shall be paint or plastic as noted in the Bid item meeting the requirements of Section 9-34. Glass beads for paint shall meet the requirements of Section 9-34.4. Glass beads for plastic shall be as recommended by the material manufacturer. 8-22.3
Construction Requirements 8-22.3(1)
Preliminary Spotting
The Engineer will provide necessary control points at intervals agreed upon with the
Contractor to assist in preliminary spotting of the lines before marking begins. The
Contractor shall be responsible for preliminary spotting of the lines to be marked.
Approval by the Engineer is required before marking begins. Preliminary spotting to guide the striping machine is required for all longitudinal lines except where a clearly visible separation is present. Preliminary spotting shall be provided at a spacing of 100 feet maximum on tangents and 25‑feet maximum on curves. The color of the material used for spotting shall match the color of the permanent marking. 8-22.3(2)
Preparation of Roadway Surfaces
All surfaces shall be dry, free of loose debris, and within the proper temperature range prior to striping. When required by the pavement marking manufacturer’s installation instructions, pavement markings that will adversely affect the bond of new pavement marking material to the roadway surface shall be removed from pavement surfaces in accordance with Section 8-22.3(6).
Remove all other contaminants from pavement surfaces that may adversely affect the installation of new pavement marking.
Apply pavement marking materials to new HMA that is sufficiently cured according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Typically, Type D material applied to new HMA pavement requires a pavement cure period of 21 days. This cure period may be reduced if the manufacturer performs a successful adhesion test and approves the reduction of the pavement cure period.
For new Portland cement concrete surfaces, remove curing compounds and laitance by an approved mechanical means. Air blast the pavement with a high-pressure system to remove extraneous or loose material. Apply pavement marking materials to concrete that has reached a minimum compressive strength of 2,500 psi and that is sufficiently cured according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Typically, Type D material applied to
Portland cement concrete pavement requires a pavement cure period of 28 days. This cure period may be reduced if the manufacturer performs a successful adhesion test and approves the reduction of the pavement cure period.

2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-127 8-22
Pavement Marking
After the pavement surface is clean and dry, apply primer as recommended by the manufacturer to the area receiving the pavement markings. Apply the primer in a continuous, solid film according to the recommendations of the primer manufacturer and the pavement markings manufacturer. 8-22.3(3)
Marking Application 8-22.3(3)A
Marking Colors
Lane line and right edge line shall be white in color. Centerline and left edge line shall be yellow in color. Transverse markings shall be white, except as otherwise noted in the
Standard Plans. 8-22.3(3)B
Line Patterns

Solid Line – A continuous line without gaps.
Broken Line – A line consisting of solid line segments separated by gaps.
Dotted Line – A broken line with noticeably shorter line segments separated by noticeably shorter gaps. 8-22.3(3)C
Line Surfaces
Flat Lines – Pavement marking lines with a flat surface.
Profiled Marking – A profiled pavement marking is a marking that consists of a base line thickness and a profiled thickness, which is a portion of the pavement marking line that is applied at a greater thickness than the base line thickness. Profiles shall be applied using the extruded method in the same application as the base line. The profiles may be slightly rounded provided the minimum profile thickness is the same throughout the length of the profile. See the Plans for the construction details.
Embossed Plastic Line – Embossed plastic lines consist of a flat line with transverse grooves. An embossed plastic line may also have profiles. See the Plans for the construction details. 8-22.3(3)D
Line Applications
Surface Line – A line constructed by applying pavement marking material directly to the pavement surface or existing pavement marking.
Grooved Line – A line constructed by grinding or saw cutting a groove into the pavement surface and spraying, extruding, or gluing pavement marking material into the groove.
Groove depth is measured vertically from the bottom of a 2 foot or longer straightedge placed on the roadway surface to the ground surface. The groove depth is dependent upon the material used, the pavement surface, and the location. See these Standard
Specifications, the project Plans, and Special Provisions. Grooved line pavement marking shall not be constructed on bridge decks or on bridge approach slabs. 8-22.3(3)E

Installation
Apply pavement marking materials to clean, dry pavement surfaces and according to the following: 1.
Place material according to the manufacture’s recommendations, 2.
Place parallel double lines 4 inches wide in one pass, 3.
The top of pavement marking shall be smooth and uniform, 4.
Line ends shall be square and clean, 5.
Place pavement marking lines parallel and true to line, and 6.
Place markings in proper alignment with existing markings.
Page 8-128
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10

Pavement Marking 8-22
When applying paint, Type A or Type C material, ensure that both the pavement surface and the air temperature at the time of application are not less than 50°F and rising. When applying Type B or Type D material, ensure that both the pavement surface and the air temperature at the time of application are not less than 40°F and rising.
Ensure that the Type A thermoplastic material meets the manufacturer’s temperature specifications when it contacts the pavement surface.
Two applications of paint will be required to complete all paint markings. The second application of paint shall be squarely on top of the first pass. The time period between paint applications will vary depending on the type of pavement and paint (low VOC waterborne or low VOC solvent) as follows:
Pavement Type
Paint Type
Time Period
Bituminous Surface Treatment
Low VOC Waterborne
4 hours min., 48 hours max.

Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement
4 hours min., 30 days max.
Cement Concrete Pavement
4 hours min., 30 days max.
Low VOC Solvent
40 min. min., 48 hrs. max.
40 min. min., 30 days max.
40 min. min., 30 days max.
Centerlines on two-lane Highways with broken line patterns, paint, or plastic shall be applied in cycle with existing broken lines. Broken line patterns applied to multilane or divided Roadways shall be applied in cycle in the direction of travel.
Where paint is applied on centerline on two-way roads with bituminous surface treatment or centerline rumble strips, the second paint application shall be applied in the opposite (decreasing milepost) direction as the first application (increasing milepost) direction. This will require minor broken line pattern corrections for curves on the second application. 8-22.3(3)F

Application Thickness
Pavement markings shall be applied at the following base line thickness measured above the pavement surface or above the groove bottom for grooved markings in thousandths of an inch (mils):
Marking Material Application
Paint – first coat
Paint – second coat
Type A – flat/transverse & symbols
Type A – flat/long line & symbols
Type A – with profiles
Type A – embossed
Type A – embossed with profiles
Type A – grooved/flat/long line
Type B – flat/transverse & symbols
Type C-2 – flat/transverse & symbols
Type C-1 & 2 – flat/long line
Type C-1 – grooved/flat/long line
Type D – flat/transverse & symbols
Type D – flat/long line
Type D – profiled/long line
Type D – grooved/flat/long line
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10 spray spray extruded spray extruded extruded extruded extruded heat fused adhesive adhesive adhesive spray extruded spray extruded extruded extruded
HMA 10 15 125 90 90 160 160 230 125 90 60 60 120 120 90 90 90 230
PCC 10 15 125 90 90 160 160 230 125 90 60 60 120 120 90 90 90 230
BST 10 15 125 120 120 160 160 230 125
NA 120 120 120 120 120 230
Groove
Depth 250 100 250
Page 8-129 8-22
Pavement Marking
Liquid pavement marking material yield per gallon depending on thickness shall not exceed the following:
Mils thickness

Feet of 4″ line/gallon
Square feet/gallon 10 483 161 15 322 108 18 268 89 20 242 80 22 220 73 24 202 67 30 161 54 40 122 41 45 107 36 60 81 27 90 54 18
90 with profiles 30 10 120 40 13
120 with profiles 26 9 230 21 7
Solid pavement marking material (Type A) yield per 50-pound bag shall not exceed the following:
Feet of 4″ line/50# bag
Square feet/50# bag 30 – flat 358 120 45 – flat 240 80 60 – flat 179 60 90 – flat 120 40 90 – flat with profiles 67 23 120 – flat 90 30 120 – flat with profiles 58 20 125 – embossed 86 29 125 – embossed with profiles 58 20 230 – flat grooved 47 15
All grooved lines shall be applied into a groove cut or ground into the pavement. For
Type A or Type D material, the groove shall be cut or ground with equipment to produce a smooth square groove 4 inches wide. For Type C-1 material, the groove shall be cut with equipment to produce a smooth bottom square groove with a width in accordance with the material manufacturer’s recommendation. After grinding, clean the groove.
Immediately before placing the marking material, clean the groove with high-pressure air. 8-22.3(3)G

Glass beads
Top dress glass beads shall be applied to all spray and extruded pavement marking material. Glass beads shall be applied by a bead dispenser immediately following the pavement marking material application. Glass bead dispensers shall apply the glass beads in a manner such that the beads appear uniform on the entire pavement marking surface with 50 to 60 percent embedment. Hand casting of beads will not be allowed.
Page 8-130
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Pavement Marking 8-22
Glass beads shall be applied to 10 or 15 mil thick paint at a minimum application rate of 7 pounds per gallon of paint. For plastic pavement markings, glass bead type and application rate shall be as recommended by the marking material manufacturer.
When two or more spray applications are required to meet thickness requirements for
Type A and Type D materials, top dressing with glass beads is only allowed on the last application. The cure period between successive applications shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Loose beads, dirt or other debris shall be swept or blown off the line prior to application of each successive application. Successive applications shall be applied squarely on top of the preceding application. 8-22.3(4)
Tolerances for Lines and Grooves
Allowable tolerances for lines are as follows:
Length of Line – The longitudinal accumulative error within a 40 foot length of broken line shall not exceed plus or minus 1 inch. The broken line segment shall not be less than 10 feet.
Width of Line – The width of the line shall not be less than the specified line width or greater than the specified line width plus ¼ inch.
Lane Width – The lane width, which is defined as the lateral width from the edge of pavement to the center of the lane line or between the centers of successive lane lines, shall not vary from the widths shown in the Contract by more than plus or minus
4 inches.
Thickness – A thickness tolerance not exceeding plus 10 percent will be allowed for thickness or yield in paint and plastic material application.
Parallel Lines – The gap tolerance between parallel lines is plus or minus ½ inch.
Grooves – All grooves for grooved pavement shall not exceed the length of the pavement marking by more than 1 inch, the width of the pavement marking by more than ½ inch, or the depth of groove by more than ¼ inch. 8-22.3(5)

Installation Instructions
Installation instructions for plastic markings shall be provided for the Engineer.
The instructions shall include equipment requirements, approved work methods and procedures, material application temperature range, air and pavement surface temperature requirements, weather limitations, precautions, and all other requirements for successful application and material performance. Do not use materials with incomplete or missing instructions. All materials including glass beads shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. A manufacturer’s technical representative shall be present at the initial installation of plastic material to approve the installation procedure, or the material manufacturer shall certify that the Contractor will install the plastic material in accordance with their recommended procedure. 8-22.3(6)
Removal of Pavement Markings
Pavement markings to be removed shall be obliterated until all blemishes caused by the pavement marking removal conform to the coloration of the adjacent pavement.
Grinding to remove pavement markings in their entirety is allowed in areas designated for applications of either Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) or Bituminous Surface Treatment (BST).
Pavement marking removal shall be performed from April 1st through September 30th and only in those areas that shall be paved within the same time window as the grinding, unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer in writing.
For all cement concrete pavement and areas that will not be overlaid with hot mix asphalt or BST, grinding is allowed to a depth just above the pavement surface and then Water blasting or shot blasting shall be required to remove the remaining pavement markings.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-131 8-22
Pavement Marking
If in the opinion of the Engineer, the pavement is materially damaged by pavement marking removal, such damage shall be repaired by the Contractor in accordance with
Section 1-07.13(1). Sand or other material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing lines and markings shall be removed as the Work progresses to avoid hazardous conditions. Accumulation of sand or other material which might interfere with drainage will not be permitted. 8-22.4
Measurement
Center line, no pass line, center line with no pass line, double center line, double lane line, edge line, solid lane line, dotted lane line, dotted extension line, lane line, reversible lane line, and two-way left-turn center line will be measured by the completed linear foot as “Paint Line”, “Plastic Line”, “Embossed Plastic Line”, “Profiled Plastic Line”, “Profiled
Embossed Plastic Line” or Grooved Plastic Line”.
The measurement for “Paint Line” will be based on a marking system capable of simultaneous application of three 4-inch lines with two 4-inch spaces. No deduction will be made for the unmarked area when the marking includes a broken line such as center line, dotted extension line, center line with no-pass line, lane line, reversible lane line, or two-way left-turn center line. No additional measurement will be made when more than one line can be installed on a single pass such as center line with no-pass line, double center line, double lane line, reversible lane line, or two-way left-turn center line.
The measurement for “Plastic Line”, “Embossed Plastic Line”, “Profiled Plastic Line”, “Profiled Embossed Plastic Line”, or “Grooved Plastic Line” will be based on the total length of each 4 inch wide plastic line installed. No deduction will be made for the unmarked area when the marking includes a broken line such as, center line, dotted extension line, center line with no-pass line, lane line, reversible lane line, or two-way leftturn center line.
Wide dotted circulating lane line, wide solid lane line, strong lane line, wide edge line, wide lane line, wide broken lane line, double wide lane line, wide dotted lane line, and wide dotted extension line will be measured by the completed linear foot as “Painted
Wide Line”, “Plastic Wide Line”, “Profiled Plastic Wide Line”, Profiled Embossed Wide Line”, or “Grooved Plastic Wide Line”. The measurement for double wide lane line will be based on the total length of each wide lane line installed.
The measurement for “Painted Wide Line”, “Plastic Wide Line”, “Profiled Plastic Wide
Line”, “Profiled Embossed Wide Line”, or “Grooved Plastic Wide Line” will be based on the total length of each 8-inch wide line installed. No deduction will be made for the unmarked area when the marking includes a broken or dotted line.
Wide Dotted Entry Line will be measured by the completed linear foot as “Painted 12-inch
Line” or “Plastic 12-inch Line”. No deduction will be made for the unmarked area when the marking includes a broken or dotted line. “Painted Barrier Center Line”, “Plastic Barrier Center Line”, “Painted Stop Line”, and “Plastic
Stop Line”, will be based on the total length of each painted, plastic or profiled plastic line installed.
No additional measurement for payment will be made for the required second application of paint. No additional measurement for payment will be made for additional applications required to meet thickness requirements for plastic markings.
Diagonal lines used to delineate parking stalls that are constructed of painted or plastic 4-inch lines will be measured as “Paint Line” or “Plastic Line” by the linear foot of line installed. Crosswalk line will be measured by the square foot of marking installed.
Crosshatch markings used to delineate median and gore areas will be measured by the completed linear foot as “Painted Crosshatch Marking” or “Plastic Crosshatch Marking” and will be based on the total length of each 8-inch or 12-inch wide line installed.
Page 8-132

2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Pavement Marking 8-22
Traffic arrows, traffic letters, access parking space symbols, HOV symbols, railroad crossing symbols, drainage markings, junction box markings, bicycle lane symbols, aerial surveillance full, and ½ markers, yield line symbols, yield ahead symbols, and speed bump symbols will be measured per each. Type 1 through 6 traffic arrows will be measured as one unit each, regardless of the number of arrow heads.
Removal of lines, regardless of width, will be measured by the linear foot, with no deduction being made for the unmarked area when the marking includes a gap.
Removal of traffic arrows, traffic letters, access parking space symbol, HOV lane symbol, railroad crossing symbol, bicycle lane symbols, drainage markings, aerial surveillance full and ½ markers, yield line symbol, yield ahead symbol, and speed bump symbol will be measured per each. Removal of crosswalk lines will be measured by the square foot of lines removed. 8-22.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Paint Line”, per linear foot. “Plastic Line”, per linear foot. “Embossed Plastic Line”, per linear foot. “Profiled Plastic Line”, per linear foot. “Profiled Embossed Plastic Line”, per linear foot. “Grooved Plastic Line”, per linear foot. “Painted Wide Line”, per linear foot. “Plastic Wide Line”, per linear foot. “Embossed Plastic Wide Line” per linear foot. “Profiled Plastic Wide Line”, per linear foot. “Profiled Embossed Plastic Wide Line”, per linear foot. “Grooved Plastic Wide Line”, per linear foot. “Painted 12-inch Wide Line”, per linear foot. “Plastic 12-inch Wide Line”, per linear foot. “Painted Barrier Center Line”, per linear foot. “Plastic Barrier Center Line”, per linear foot. “Painted Stop Line”, per linear foot. “Plastic Stop Line”, per linear foot. “Painted Crosswalk Line”, per square foot. “Plastic Crosswalk Line”, per square foot. “Painted Crosshatch Marking”, per linear foot. “Plastic Crosshatch Marking”, per linear foot. “Painted Traffic Arrow”, per each. “Plastic Traffic Arrow”, per each. “Painted Traffic Letter”, per each. “Plastic Traffic Letter”, per each. “Painted Access Parking Space Symbol”, per each. “Plastic Access Parking Space Symbol”, per each. “Painted Railroad Crossing Symbol”, per each.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-133

8-22
Pavement Marking “Plastic Railroad Crossing Symbol”, per each. “Painted Bicycle Lane Symbol”, per each. “Plastic Bicycle Lane Symbol”, per each. “Painted Drainage Marking”, per each. “Plastic Drainage Marking”, per each. “Painted Junction Box Marking”, per each. “Plastic Junction Box Marking”, per each. “Painted Aerial Surveillance Full Marker”, per each. “Plastic Aerial Surveillance Full Marker”, per each. “Painted Aerial Surveillance ½ Marker”, per each. “Plastic Aerial Surveillance ½ Marker”, per each. “Painted Access Parking Space Symbol with Background”, per each. “Plastic Access Parking Space Symbol with Background”, per each. “Painted HOV Lane Symbol”, per each. “Plastic HOV Lane Symbol”, per each. “Painted Yield Line Symbol”, per each. “Plastic Yield Line Symbol”, per each. “Painted Yield Ahead Symbol”, per each. “Plastic Yield Ahead Symbol”, per each. “Painted Speed Bump Symbol”, per each. “Plastic Speed Bump Symbol”, per each. “Removing Paint Line”, per linear foot. “Removing Plastic Line”, per linear foot. “Removing Painted Crosswalk Line”, per square foot. “Removing Plastic Crosswalk Line”, per square foot. “Removing Painted Traffic Marking”, per each. “Removing Plastic Traffic Marking”, per each.
The unit Contract price for the aforementioned Bid items shall be full payment for all costs to perform the Work as described in Section 8-22.
Page 8-134
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Temporary Pavement Markings 8-23 8-23
Temporary Pavement Markings 8-23.1
Description
The Work consists of furnishing and installing temporary pavement markings. Temporary pavement markings shall be provided where noted in the Plans and for all lane shifts and detours resulting from construction activities; or when permanent markings are removed because of construction operations. Any conflicting pavement markings shall be removed in accordance with Section 8-22.3(6). 8-23.2
Materials
Materials for temporary markings shall be paint, plastic, tape, raised pavement markers or flexible raised pavement markers. Materials for pavement markings shall meet the following requirements:
Raised Pavement Marker
Temporary Marking Paint
Plastic
Glass Beads for Pavement Marking Materials
Temporary Pavement Marking Tape
Temporary Flexible Raised Pavement Markers 8-23.3 8-23.3(1)

9-21 9-34.2(6) 9-34.3 9-34.4 9-34.5 9-34.6
Construction Requirements
General
The Contractor shall select the type of pavement marking material in accordance with the
Contract. 8-23.3(2)
Preliminary Spotting
All preliminary layout and marking in preparation for application and the application and removal of temporary pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the Contractor. 8-23.3(3)
Preparation of Roadway Surface
Surface preparation for temporary pavement markings shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. 8-23.3(4)
Pavement Marking Application

8-23.3(4)A
Temporary Pavement Markings – Short Duration
Temporary pavement markings – short duration shall be in accordance with the Standard
Plans and meet the following requirements:
Temporary Center Line – A BROKEN line used to delineate adjacent lanes of traffic moving in opposite directions. The broken pattern shall be based on a 40-foot unit, consisting of a 4-foot line with a 36-foot gap if paint or tape is used. If temporary raised pavement markers are used, the pattern shall be based on a 40-foot unit, consisting of a grouping of three temporary raised pavement markers, each spaced 3 feet apart, with a 34 foot gap.
Temporary Edge Line – A SOLID line used on the edges of Traveled Way. The line shall be continuous if paint or tape is used. If temporary raised pavement markers are used, the line shall consist of markers installed continuously at 5-foot spacings.
Temporary Lane Line – A BROKEN line used to delineate adjacent lanes with traffic traveling in the same direction. The broken pattern shall be based on a 40-foot unit, consisting of a 4-foot line with a 36-foot gap, if paint or tape is used. If temporary raised pavement markers are used, the pattern shall be based on a 40-foot unit, consisting of a grouping of three temporary raised pavement markers, each spaced 3 feet apart, with a
34 foot gap.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-135 8-23
Temporary Pavement Markings
Temporary Miscellaneous Pavement Markings – A solid symbol or linear marking for traffic arrows, HOV lane symbols, and other markings made with white paint or tape.
Symbols should mimic those shown in the Standard Plans.
Temporary Stop Line – A solid transverse line made with white paint or tape in accordance with the Standard Plans.
Temporary Crosswalk Line – Solid transverse lines made with white paint or tape in accordance with the Standard Plans.
Lane line and right edge line shall be white in color. Center line and left edge line shall be yellow in color. Edge Lines shall be installed only if specifically required in the Contract. All temporary pavement markings shall be retroreflective. 8-23.3(4)A1
Temporary Pavement Marking Paint
Paint used for short duration temporary pavement markings shall be applied in one application at a thickness of 15 mils or 108 square feet per gallon. Glass beads shall be in accordance with Section 8-22.3(3)G. 8-23.3(4)A2
Temporary Pavement Marking Tape

Application of temporary pavement marking tape shall be in conformance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Black mask pavement marking tape shall mask the existing line in its entirety. 8-23.3(4)A3
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers
Temporary raised pavement markers are not allowed on bituminous surface treatments. 8-23.3(4)A4
Temporary Flexible Raised Pavement Markers
Flexible raised pavement markers are required for new applications of bituminous surface treatments. Flexible raised pavement markers are not allowed on other pavement types unless otherwise specified or approved by the Engineer. Flexible raised pavement markers shall be installed with the protective cover in place. The cover shall be removed immediately after spraying asphaltic material. 8-23.3(4)B
Temporary Pavement Markings – Long Duration
Temporary pavement markings – long duration shall be in accordance with the Standard
Plans and shall meet the following requirements:
Temporary Center Line – A BROKEN line used to delineate adjacent lanes of traffic moving in opposite directions. The broken pattern shall be based on a 40-foot unit, consisting of a 10-foot line with a 30-foot gap of paint or tape.
Temporary Edge Line – A SOLID line used on the edges of Traveled Way. The line shall be continuous paint or tape.
Temporary Lane Line – A BROKEN line used to delineate adjacent lanes with traffic traveling in the same direction. The broken pattern shall be based on a 40-foot unit, consisting of a 10-foot line with a 30-foot gap, of paint or tape.
Temporary Miscellaneous Pavement Markings – A solid symbol or linear marking in accordance with the standard plans for traffic arrows, HOV lane symbols, and other markings made in accordance with the Standard Plans with white paint or tape.
Temporary Stop Line – A solid transverse line made with white paint or tape in accordance with the Standard Plans.

Page 8-136
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Temporary Pavement Markings 8-23
Temporary Crosswalk Line – Solid transverse lines made with white paint or tape in accordance with the Standard Plans.
Application of paint, pavement marking tape and plastic for long duration pavement markings shall meet the requirements of Section 8-22.3(3); application of raised pavement markers shall meet the requirements of Section 8-09.3; and application of flexible pavement markings shall be in conformance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. 8-23.3(4)C
Tolerance for Lines
Tolerance for lines shall conform to Section 8-22.3(4). 8-23.3(4)D
Maintenance of Pavement Markings
Temporary pavement markings shall be maintained in serviceable condition throughout the project until permanent pavement markings are installed. As directed by the Engineer; temporary pavement markings that are damaged, including normal wear by traffic, shall be repaired or replaced immediately. Repaired and replaced pavement markings shall meet the requirements for the original pavement marking. 8-23.3(4)E
Removal of Pavement Markings
Removal of temporary paint is not required prior to paving; all other temporary pavement markings shall be removed.
All temporary pavement markings that are required on the wearing course prior to construction of permanent pavement markings and are not a part of the permanent markings shall be completely removed concurrent with or immediately subsequent to the construction of the permanent pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturer’s permanent marking application instructions. Temporary flexible raised pavement markers on bituminous surface treatment pavements shall be cut off flush with the surface if their location conflicts with the alignment of the permanent pavement markings. All other temporary pavement markings shall be removed in accordance with Section 8-22.3(6).
All damage to the permanent Work caused by removing temporary pavement markings shall be repaired by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency. 8-23.4

Measurement
Temporary center lines, edge lines, lane lines or other temporary longitudinal pavement markings will be measured by the linear foot of each installed line or grouping of markers, with no deduction for gaps in the line or markers and no additional measurement for the second application of paint required for long duration paint lines. Short duration and long duration temporary pavement markings will be measured for the initial installation only.
Temporary miscellaneous pavement marking will be measured per each for temporary traffic arrow, HOV lane symbol, and other markings placed.
Temporary Stop Line will be measured by the linear foot of installed line.
Temporary crosswalk lines will be measured by the square foot for each crosswalk line placed to complete a crosswalk.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-137 8-23 8-23.5
Temporary Pavement Markings
Payment

Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Temporary Pavement Marking – Short Duration”, per linear foot. “Temporary Pavement Marking – Long Duration”, per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot for “Temporary Pavement Marking – Short
Duration” and “Temporary Pavement Marking – Long Duration” shall be full pay for all
Work as specified. “Temporary Misc. Pavement Marking – Short Duration”, per each. “Temporary Misc. Pavement Marking – Long Duration”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Temporary Misc. Pavement Marking – Short
Duration”, and “Temporary Misc. Pavement Marking – Long Duration”, shall be full pay for all Work as specified. “Temporary Stop Line – Short Duration”, – per linear foot. “Temporary Stop Line – Long Duration”, – per linear foot.
The unit Contract price per linear foot “Temporary Stop Line – Short Duration”, and “Temporary Stop Line – Long Duration”, shall be full pay for all Work as specified. “Temporary Crosswalk Line – Short Duration”, – per square foot. “Temporary Crosswalk Line – Long Duration”, – per square foot.
The unit Contract price per square foot for “Temporary Crosswalk Line – Short
Duration”, and “Temporary Crosswalk Line – Long Duration”, shall be full pay for all
Work as specified.

Page 8-138
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Rock and Gravity Block Wall and Gabion Cribbing 8-24 8-24
Rock and Gravity Block Wall and Gabion Cribbing 8-24.1
Description
This Work consists of constructing rock and gravity block wall(s), and gabion cribbing in accordance with the Plans, Special Provisions, these Specifications, or as designated by the Engineer. 8-24.2
Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections:
Rock for Rock Wall and Chinking Material
Backfill for Rock Wall
Gabion Cribbing
Wire Mesh Fabric
PVC Coating for Welded Wire Mesh Fabric
Gabion Basket Fasteners
Stone
Construction Geotextile

9-13.7(1) 9-13.7(2) 9-27.3 9-27.3(1) 9-27.3(2) 9-27.3(4) 9-27.3(6) 9-33
Materials for gravity block walls shall be as specified in the Special Provisions. 8-24.3
Construction Requirements 8-24.3(1)
Rock Wall 8-24.3(1)A
Geometric Tolerances
The completed wall shall meet the following tolerances: 1.
Wall batter shall be 6:1 or flatter as specified in the Plans. 2.
The exterior slope plane and grade in the finished surface of the wall shall be plus or minus 6 inches. 3.
The maximum void between adjacent rocks shall be 6 inches as measured at the smallest dimensions of the void within the thickness of the wall. 8-24.3(1)B
Excavation

Excavation shall conform to Section 2-09.3(4), and to the limits and construction stages shown in the Plans.
The Contractor shall restrict the excavation limits to the length of rock wall that can be constructed in 1 day’s Work, except as otherwise noted. The Engineer may permit excavation beyond the limits that can be completed in 1 day’s Work provided the
Contractor either demonstrates that the excavation will remain stable until the rock wall is completed, or shores the excavation in accordance with Section 2-09.3(4).
Slope above the rock wall shall be established prior to excavating for the wall. 8-24.3(1)C
Foundation Preparation
The foundation for the wall shall be graded as shown in the Plans.
Prior to rock placement, the foundation, if not in rock, shall be compacted as approved by the Engineer. Any foundation soils found to be unsuitable shall be removed and replaced in accordance with Section 2-09.3(1)C.
Base course rocks shall have full contact with the foundation soils. If necessary, the excavation shall be shaped to fit the rocks. Rocks may be dropped to shape the ground provided the rocks do not crack. Cracked rocks shall be replaced and the foundation regraded to fit the replacement rock.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-139 8-24 8-24.3(1)D
Rock and Gravity Block Wall and Gabion Cribbing
Construction Geotextile
Construction geotextile shall be of the type, and shall be placed, as shown in the Plans. 8-24.3(1)E
Rock Placement and Backfill
Rocks shall be placed so there are no continuous joint planes in either the vertical or lateral direction.
Where possible, rocks shall be placed so that the rock shall bear on at least two rocks below it. Rocks shall be oriented so that flat surface contact points between adjacent rocks are maximized. Point-to-point contact between adjacent rocks shall be minimized.
Each rock in a course shall be arranged so that the natural irregularities in the rocks key the rocks together and so that the courses are keyed together.
Rocks shall increase in size from the top of the wall to the bottom at a uniform rate. The minimum rock sizes, as referenced from the top of the wall, shall be as follows:
Depth From Top of Wall (feet)

Minimum Rock Size at Depth From Top of Wall 6
Three Man 9
Four Man 12
Five Man
Rocks at the top of the wall shall be Two Man or larger.
Where voids larger than 6 inches are present, chinking rock shall be keyed between the rocks to fill the void.
Backfill for the rock wall shall be placed behind each course and tamped to provide a stable condition prior to placing rocks for the next successive course.
For rock walls constructed in fills, the fill shall be overbuilt and cut back to construct the wall. 8-24.3(2)
Gravity Block Wall
Excavation shall conform to Section 2-09.3(4), and to the limits and construction stages shown in the Plans. Foundation soils found to be unsuitable shall be removed and replaced in accordance with Section 2-09.3(1)C. Slope above the gravity block wall shall be established prior to beginning any excavation for the wall.
Gravity block walls are defined as a wall of modular blocks acting as a gravity wall to retain soil. The modular blocks may have features designed to interlock the blocks together.
However there shall be no reinforcement of the retained soil nor any reinforcement connection between the modular blocks and the retained soil.
Gravity block walls shall be constructed as specified in the Special Provisions and as shown in the Plans. 8-24.3(3)

Gabion Cribbing 8-24.3(3)A
Foundations
Before placing any gabion cribbing, the Contractor shall excavate the foundation or bed to the specified grade in accordance with Section 2-09.3(4). Foundation soils found to be unsuitable shall be removed and replaced in accordance with Section 2-09.3(1)C. 8-24.3(3)B
Baskets
Baskets may be fabricated from either woven or welded steel wire; however, a gabion
Structure shall not include both. Baskets may be assembled with either lacing wire or clip fasteners; however, a perimeter or diaphragm edge shall not include both.
Page 8-140
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Rock and Gravity Block Wall and Gabion Cribbing 8-24.3(3)C 8-24
Dimensions
The Contractor shall supply gabion baskets in the lengths and heights the Plans require.
Each length shall be a multiple (double, triple, or greater) of horizontal width. Horizontal width shall be 36 inches. All baskets from the same manufacturer shall be the same width and shall be within a tolerance of 5 percent of the manufacturer’s stated sizes. 8-24.3(3)D

Fabrication of Baskets
Gabions shall be made so that the sides, ends, lid, and diaphragms can be assembled into rectangular baskets of the required sizes at the construction site. Common-wall construction may be used in gabion Structures up to 12 feet high. Common-wall construction includes any basket where its top serves as the bottom of the one above it, or where one wall also serves an adjacent basket. When gabion Structures are more than
12 feet high, the baskets shall have independent sides, ends, top, and bottom.
Each gabion shall be divided by diaphragms into cells the same length as horizontal basket width. Diaphragms shall be made of the same mesh and gage as the basket body.
All perimeter and diaphragm edges shall be laced or clipped together so that joints are at least as strong as the body of the mesh itself. The ends of the lacing shall be anchored by three tight turns around the selvage wire. 8-24.3(3)E
Filling Baskets
Baskets shall be filled with stone. The stone shall be placed and compacted to meet the unit weight requirements of Section 8-24.3(3)F.
The stone shall be placed in compacted layers not more than 14 inches deep. If crossconnecting wires are required, the Contractor shall adjust the number and depth of layers so that wires occur between the compacted layers of stone. 8-24.3(3)F
Unit Weight Requirements and Test
The unit weight of the filled gabion basket shall be at least 100 pounds per cubic foot.
Should the unit weight be less than 100 pounds per cubic foot, the gabion will be rejected and the Engineer will require the Contractor to conduct and pass additional unit weight tests before completing other gabions.
The Contractor shall conduct either of the following unit weight tests to prove the density of completed gabions: 1.

A filled gabion basket shall be selected from the completed Structure and weighed. 2.
A gabion basket shall be filled with stone from a loaded truck that has been weighed.
After filling, the truck and unused stone shall be weighed again. The difference between the two weights shall be used to determine the weight per cubic foot of the stone in the gabion.
The Contractor shall conduct one unit weight test for each 500 cubic yards of gabions placed. The Engineer may reduce the specified frequency of these tests provided the specified minimum unit weight has been consistently achieved.
In conducting unit weight test 1 or 2, the Contractor shall provide and use scales conforming to Section 1-09.2.
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10
Page 8-141 8-24 8-24.3(3)G
Rock and Gravity Block Wall and Gabion Cribbing
Gabion Cribbing Erection

Each row or tier of baskets shall be reasonably straight and shall conform to alignment and grade. Hexagonal mesh baskets shall be stretched endwise before filling. The stone shall be carefully placed in layers, then tamped or vibrated. The last layer of stones shall fill each basket completely so that the secured lid will rest upon the stones. Each basket shall be laced securely to all adjacent baskets and its lid then laced or clipped to the sides, ends, and diaphragms.
All selvage wires of ends of adjacent baskets shall be laced together. The bottom selvage of the basket being constructed on a previously constructed basket shall be laced to the top of that basket.
Backfilling behind or around gabions shall conform to Section 2-09.3(1)E. 8-24.4
Measurement
Rock for rock walls and backfill for rock walls will be measured by the ton of rock actually placed.
Gabion cribbing will be measured by the calculated neat line volume of gabion baskets in place, using the manufacturer’s stated dimensions.
Gravity block wall will be measured by the square foot of completed wall in place. The vertical limits for measurement are from the bottom of the bottom layer of blocks to the top of the top layer of blocks. The horizontal limits for measurement are from the end of wall to the end of wall.
Construction geotextile will be measured by the square yard for the surface area actually covered.
Structure excavation Class B, Structure excavation Class B including haul, and shoring or extra excavation Class B, will be measured in accordance with Section 2-09.4. 8-24.5
Payment

Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Rock for Rock Wall”, per ton.
The unit Contract price per ton for “Rock for Rock Wall” shall also include furnishing and installing chinking materials. “Backfill for Rock Wall”, per ton. “Gabion Cribbing”, per cubic yard. “Gravity Block Wall”, per square foot. “Construction Geotextile”, per square yard. “Structure Excavation Class B”, per cubic yard. “Structure Excavation Class B Incl. Haul”, per cubic yard. “Shoring or Extra Excavation Class B”, per square foot.
Page 8-142
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Glare Screen 8-25 8-25
Glare Screen 8-25.1
Description
This Work consists of furnishing and constructing glare screen of the types specified, in accordance with the Plans, these Specifications, the Standard Plans, and as ordered by the Engineer in accordance with Section 1-04.4.
Glare screen consists of diamond woven wire mesh fence of aluminum, galvanized or aluminum coated steel wire, fabricated and placed to reduce glare from headlights of opposing traffic or other adjacent light sources. 8-25.2
Materials

Materials shall meet the requirements of Section 9-16.6. 8-25.3
Construction Requirements 8-25.3(1)
Glare Screen Fabric
Glare screen fabric shall be placed on the face of the posts designated by the Engineer.
On curves, the fabric shall be placed on the face of the post that is on the outside of the curve.
The fabric shall be stretched taut and securely fastened to the posts. Fastening to end, corner, and pull posts shall be with stretcher bars and fabric bands spaced at 1-foot intervals. The fabric shall be cut and each span attached independently at all pull and corner posts. Fabric shall be securely fastened to line and brace posts with tie wires, metal bands, or other approved methods, attached at 14-inch intervals. The top and bottom of the fabric shall be fastened to the tension wire with hog rings spaced at 24-inch intervals.
Rolls of wire fabric shall be joined by weaving a single strand into the end of the rolls to form a continuous mesh. 8-25.3(2)
Slats
The slats shall be fastened into the weave by using staples, screws, or other methods as approved by the Engineer. Allowing the tension of the mesh to hold the slats in place will not be permitted.
Slats broken or split during construction shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor at no expense to the Contracting Agency. 8-25.3(3)

Posts
Posts shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard Plans and applicable provisions of Section 8-12.3(1)A.
Posts for Type 1 Design A shall be bolted to the beam guardrail posts as detailed in the
Standard Plans. Drilling of the guardrail posts shall be done in such a manner to ensure that the glare screen posts are set plumb and centered over the guardrail posts unless otherwise directed.
All round posts for Type 1 Design B and Type 2 glare screen shall be fitted with a watertight top securely fastened to the post. Line posts shall have tops designed to carry the top tension wire. 8-25.3(4)
Tension Wire
Tension wires shall be attached to the posts as detailed in the Standard Plans or as approved by the Engineer. 8-25.4
Measurement
Measurement of glare screen will be by the linear foot of completed glare screen for the particular type and design specified.
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 8-143 8-25 8-25.5
Glare Screen
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Glare Screen Type 1 Design ____”, per linear foot. “Glare Screen Type 2”, per linear foot.
Page 8-144
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Vacant 8-26 8-26
Vacant
2024 Standard Specifications

M 41-10
Page 8-145 8-27 8-27
Page 8-146
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Vacant 8-28 8-28
2024 Standard Specifications
Page 8-147 8-29
Wire Mesh Slope Protection 8-29
Wire Mesh Slope Protection 8-29.1
Description
This Work consists of furnishing and installing the anchors and the wire mesh slope protection in accordance with these Specifications and the details shown in the Plans and in conformity with the lines and dimensions shown in the Plans or specified by the
Engineer. 8-29.2

Materials
Materials shall meet the requirements of Section 9-16.4. 8-29.3 8-29.3(1)
Construction Requirements
Submittals
The Contractor shall submit a Type 2 Working Drawing consisting of a wire mesh slope protection plan. The wire mesh slope protection plan shall include the following: 1.
Plan sheets for anchor layout and installation, and the equipment and process used to confirm the capacity of the constructed anchors including the calibration data for the stressing devices used to proof test the anchors, as completed by an independent testing laboratory within 60 calendar days of the wire mesh slope work. 2.
Working drawings for the temporary yoke or load frame to be used for anchor proof testing in accordance with Section 6-01.9. 3.
Plans and details for assembling wire mesh and erecting the assembled mesh on the slope.
All the costs for the Work required for Submittals shall be included in the unit Bid price detailed in Section 8-29.5. 8-29.3(2)
Anchors

The Contractor shall install anchors of the type shown in the Plans and in conformance with the layout shown in the wire mesh protection plan. The spacing and number of the anchors and wire ropes as shown in the Plans are approximate only, and upon review of the wire mesh slope protection plan, the Engineer may arrange the spacing to better hold the wire mesh against the slope. Backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted with a mechanical compactor.
The Contractor shall proof test up to 25 percent of the anchors in vertical pullout to the minimum allowable anchor capacity specified in the Plans. Proof testing of anchors shall be performed against a temporary yoke or load frame. No part of the temporary yoke or load frame shall bear within three feet of the anchor being tested. For vertical pullout proof testing, an anchor is acceptable if it sustains the specified capacity for 10 minutes with no loss of load. Anchors that fail this criterion shall be replaced and retested. If more than three anchors fail, the Contractor shall proof test all anchors. 8-29.3(3)
Wire Rope
All wire rope loops shall include a thimble. No wire rope splicing will be allowed.
Page 8-148
2024 Standard Specifications M 41-10 Wire Mesh Slope Protection 8-29.3(4) 8-29
Wire Mesh
The wire mesh shall be fastened to the completed wire rope assembly as shown in the
Plans. High tensile steel fasteners on the vertical seams shall be staggered across width of the seam. Horizontal splices joining 2 rolls of mesh shall be made by overlapping the mesh approximately 3 feet and either weaving 3 rows of lacing wires through every mesh opening or using 4 rows of high tensile steel fasteners placed on approximately 3-inch spacing. All top and bottom laps shall be made by folding the mesh to the outside, away from the slope, to avoid the possibility of falling material hanging up in the folds. The bottom of the mesh shall be located as shown in the Plans. The ends of all lacing wires shall be secured to the mesh with a minimum of 1½-turns.
The wire mesh shall not be tensioned in any direction, but is to remain loose so as to increase its dampening effect on rolling rocks. The Contractor shall use care in the handling and installing of the wire mesh and wire rope. Any mesh or wire rope damaged due to the Contractor’s operations shall be replaced by the Contractor at no expense to the Contracting Agency. 8-29.4

Measurement
Measurement of anchors will be per each for the completed anchor. Anchor types will not be differentiated.
Wire mesh slope protection will be measured by the square foot of wire mesh erected on the slope. There will be no deduction made for overlapping the wire mesh material as required for splices or for coverage due to variations in the slope or ground conditions. 8-29.5
Payment
Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the
Proposal: “Wire Mesh Slope Protection Anchor”, per each.
The unit Contract price per each for “Wire Mesh Slope Protection Anchor” shall be full payment for all costs for the Work described in Sections 8-29.3(1) and 8-29.3(2). “Wire Mesh Slope Protection”, per square foot.
The unit Contract price per square foot for “Wire Mesh Slope Protection” shall be full payment for all costs for the Work described in Sections 8-29.3(3) and 8-29.3(4).
2024 Standard Specifications
M 41-10

Page 8-149 8-30
Water Crossings 8-30
Water Crossings 8-30.1
Description
This Work consists of furnishing, mixing, and placing aggregates for streams, rivers and waterbodies of the type specified at the locations and in conformity with the lines and dimensions shown in the Plans or established by the Engineer. 8-30.1(1)
Definitions
Blended Streambed Aggregate - Blended streambed aggregates are defined as a mix of the aggregates with the associated ratios in accordance with the Special Provisions or as shown in the Plans. 8-30.2
Materials
Materials for Water Crossings shall meet the following requirements:
Streambed Aggregates
Streambed Sediment
Streambed Fine Sediment
Streambed Sand
Streambed Cobbles
Streambed Boulders

9-03.11 9-03.11(1) 9-03.11(2) 9-03.11(3) 9-03.11(4) 9-03.11(5) 8-30.3
Construction Requirements 8-30.3(1)
General Requirements 8-30.3(1)A
Streambed Preconstruction Conference
A streambed preconstruction conference shall be held at least 7 calendar days prior to the
Contractor beginning streambed construction. The Contractor shall notify the Engineer
14 calendar days prior to the meeting taking