e contractor’s request for increased areas in consultation with Region Environmental staff. Work progress is of critical importance and should not be impeded except when clear probability of detrimental erosion potential exists or where permit constraints may be violated (refer to Chapter 8 of the Construction Manual for more information).
Area
Date
Location
17 Acres
April 1 – October 31
May 1 – September 30
East of the Summit of the Cascade Range
West of the Summit of the Cascade Range

5 Acres
November 1 – March 31
October 1 – April 30
COMMON BMPS SELECTED FOR ELEMENT 5  Preserving natural vegetation 5-1.1.29  Sodding 5-1.1.34  Dust control 5-1.1.13  Check dams4 5-1.1.4  Erosion control blankets 5-1.1.14  Topsoiling 5-1.1.46  Mulching 5-1.1.24  Plastic covering 5-1.1.27  Temporary and permanent seeding 5-1.1.41  Hydraulically-applied erosion control products 5-1.1.19  Stabilized construction entrances 5-1.1.35  Construction road and parking area stabilization 5-1.1.9  Tackifiers and polyacrylamide5 5-1.1.40 4
Check dams, brush barriers, straw wattles, and compost socks control flow rates and can help stabilize soils, but they are not considered soil-covering BMPs on their own. 5
Polyacrylamide (PAM) can help stabilize soils, but using it with mulch provides soil covering/additional protection.
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 2-15 TESC Plan Design
Chapter 2
Element 6: Protect Slopes

Risks associated with this element may include large erosion events on slopes. Some slopes will be more vulnerable to erosion, depending on factors such as soil type, vegetation, topographical features that influence flow path, slope length and gradient.
The requirements for this element include: 
Design, construct, and manage cut and fill slopes to minimize erosion. 
Use top of slope BMPs, such as interceptor dikes, swales, stabilized channels, or temporary pipe slope drains, to divert flows away from the slope. Place check dams in cut channels on a slope. 
Place excavated material on the uphill side of trenches, consistent with safety and space considerations. 
Where feasible, reduce continuous length or gradient of slopes with terracing or diversions. Add surface texture to slope to slow, disperse, or dissipate flows (e.g., blanket, mulch, compost sock).
Select slope stabilizing BMPs based on soil type, slope length and gradient, and identified geotechnical conditions. In some cases, geotechnical conditions may warrant permanent controls (not temporary or biodegradable) such as rock or turf reinforcement mats to prevent slope failure.
BMPs used to temporarily stabilize slopes (e.g. biodegradable blankets, HECPs) do not hold up to concentrated flows; other BMPs must be used to prevent concentrated flows from developing and causing a failure.
Manage overland flow or offsite water run-on to minimize erosion on slopes. Ensure concentrated flows or drips coming off overhead structures do not create erosion on slopes.
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 6  Pipe slope drains 5-1.1.26

 Subsurface drains 5-1.1.38  Straw wattles 5-1.1.37  Compost socks6 5-1.1.5  Mulching 5-1.1.24  Level spreaders 5-1.1.21  Temporary curbs and water bars 5-1.1.42  Brush barriers5 5-1.1.1  Interceptor dikes and swales 5-1.1.20  Gradient terraces 5-1.1.16  Erosion control blankets 5-1.1.14  Plastic covering7 5-1.1.27 6 6
Check dams, brush barriers, straw wattles, and compost socks control flow rates and can help stabilize soils, but they are not considered soil-covering BMPs on their own. 7
Plastic covering increases flow rates; protect toe of slope areas.
Page 2-16
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 2
TESC Plan Design  Conveyance channel stabilization 5-1.1.12  Hydraulically-applied erosion control products 5-1.1.19  Temporary and permanent seeding 5-1.1.41
Element 7: Protect Drain Inlets
Risks associated with this element may include sediment pollution being discharged from the site.
The requirements for this element include: 
Use inlet protection devices at all operable storm drain inlets to ensure all discharges receive sediment removal treatment.


Clean or replace inlet protection devices as needed to ensure continued sediment removal performance.
Additional Information:
Inlet filter socks only provide a minimal level of treatment for discharges and, whenever feasible, should not be relied on as the sole method for minimizing sediment release. Use erosion control BMPs to prevent turbid water from being generated and use diversion BMPs (e.g. temporary curbs) to prevent turbid water from reaching inlets. Wherever feasible, use inlet covers or plugs to prevent turbid discharges, and implement a strategy to manage the resulting ponding water.
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 7  Storm drain inlet protection 5-1.1.36  Compost socks 5-1.1.5  Silt fences 5-1.1.33  Check dams 5-1.1.4  Temporary curbs or water bars 5-1.1.42  Filter berms 5-1.1.15
Element 8: Stabilize Channels and Outlets
Risks associated with this element may include erosion within channels or outlet areas and sediment pollution being discharged from the site.
The requirements for this element include:
Design, construct, and stabilize all temporary conveyance channels to minimize erosion.
Implement stabilization methods, including armoring material, adequate to minimize erosion at the outlets of all conveyance systems.

WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 2-17 TESC Plan Design
Chapter 2
Channels and outlet areas are often exposed to concentrated flows which increase erosion related risks. These areas should be stabilized permanently as soon as work allows. Temporary controls must be used to prevent erosion, dissipate erosive energy, and prevent increases in flow rates.
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 8  Conveyance channel stabilization 5- 1.1.12  Check dams 5-1.1.4  Erosion control blankets 5-1.1.14  Sodding 5-1.1.34  Level spreaders 5-1.1.21  Outlet protection 5-1.1.25  Temporary and permanent seeding 5-1.1.41
Element 9: Control Pollutants
Risks associated with this element may include the discharge of pollutants.
The requirements for this element include:
Page 2-18 
Design, implement and maintain effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants.


Handle and dispose of pollutants, including construction and waste materials, and demolition debris, in a manner that does not cause contamination stormwater.
Prevent prohibited discharges in accordance with S1.D of the Permit.
Provide cover, containment, and protection from vandalism for all materials that have the potential to pose a threat to human health or the environment.
Onsite fueling tanks must include secondary containment capable of containing 110% of the volume in the largest fuel tank. Double-walled tanks do not require additional containment.
Conduct maintenance, fueling, and repair of heavy equipment and vehicles using spill prevention and control measures.
Clean contaminated surfaces immediately following a spill incident.
Discharge tire wash wastewater to a separate onsite treatment system that prevents discharge to surface waters, such as a closed-loop recirculation system.
Apply fertilizers and other chemicals in a manner and application rate that will not result in loss of chemical to stormwater runoff. Follow manufacturers’ requirements.
Whenever feasible, use BMPs to prevent the contamination of stormwater by pH-modifying sources such as: bulk cement, cement kiln dust, fly ash, new

WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 2
TESC Plan Design concrete and cure water, rubble or waste stockpiles, waste streams generated from concrete resurfacing or demolition, aggregate processes that include recycled concrete, dewatering concrete vaults. Potentially pH affected stormwater (as defined in Division 8-01.1 of the Standard
Specifications) must be sampled and potentially neutralized prior to discharge. Stormwater that comingles with cementitious wastewater/concrete wastewater (as defined in Division 8-01.1 of the
Standard Specifications) is considered cementitious wastewater/concrete wastewater must be managed to prevent discharge to waters of the State, including groundwater. Refer to Section 4-1.3 and BMP 5-1.1.17 for more information.  pH affected and conditionally-authorized non-stormwater (as defined in
Division 8-01.1 of the Standard Specifications) must be sampled, and potentially neutralized and dechlorinized in accordance with the CSWGP. 
Concrete spillage and concrete wastewater/cementitious wastewater (as defined in Division 8-01.1 of the Standard Specifications) are prohibited to discharge to waters of the state. Do not dump excess concrete onsite, except in designated concrete washout facilities. Do not wash out concrete trucks or handling equipment onto ground, streets, into storm drains, ditches. Refer to
BMPs 5-1.1.7, Concrete Handling, and 5-1.1.8, Concrete Washout Areas, for more information. 
Collect concrete slurry generated from cutting or grinding operations from the roadway on a continual basis immediately behind the operations, and dispose of in accordance with Division 5-01.3 of the Standard Specifications.
Refer to BMP 5-1.1.6, Concrete Cutting and Grinding Pollution Prevention, for more information. 
Obtain approval from Ecology prior to using any chemical treatment not already authorized by the Permit (e.g. pH neutralization using CO2, dry ice, or food grade vinegar).

Additional Information:
Known pre-existing site contamination should be identified as a risk in the TESC plan.
The TESC plan narrative should reference relevant contract requirements used to manage contamination. The contract must include information about existing site contamination, management strategies or performance expectations for the contractor (contact the WSDOT Hazardous Materials Program).
Control Pollutants: TESC plan
The purpose of the TESC plan is to identify risks and management strategies for controlling nonhazardous sources of pollutants, such as loose soils or turbid stormwater/groundwater, and pH affected stormwater/conditionally authorized
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 2-19 TESC Plan Design
Chapter 2 non-stormwater (as defined in Division 8-01.1 of the Standard Specifications).
Planned work activity may trigger the development of additional plans to manage pollutant-generating work such as hydro-demolition (see Standard Specification 609.3) or shaft drilling (see Standard Specification 6-19.3).
Control Pollutants: SPCC plan

The purpose of the contractor’s SPCC plan is to identify risks and management strategies that will be used for controlling potentially hazardous materials, such as cementitious materials, petroleum products, and chemicals (defined in Chapter 447 of the Environmental Procedures Manual) that the contractor plans to bring onsite.
Refer to BMP 5-1.1.22, Materials Handling, Storage, and Containment, for more information.
Ensure the SPCC plan is consistent with Standard Specification 1-07.15 as described in WSDOT SPCC Plan Preparation Instructions and Spill Plan Reviewers Protocols:  www.wsdot.wa.gov/environment/hazmat/spillprevention.htm
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 9  Concrete washout areas 5-1.1.8  Concrete handling 5-1.1.7  High-pH stormwater neutralization 5-1.1.17  Concrete cutting and grinding pollution prevention 5-1.1.6  Materials handling, storage, and containment 5-1.1.22
Element 10: Control Dewatering
Risks associated with this element include failure to provide appropriate treatment of dewatering prior to a discharge and pollution being discharged from the site.
The requirements for this element include: 
Sources of dewatering water should be kept separate from stormwater unless quality characteristics are similar. 
Dewatering treatment and disposal options include: 
Onsite Infiltration.


Offsite legal disposal facility.
Onsite treatment and discharge to surface water in accordance with the discharge sampling requirements.
Sanitary or combined sewer discharge with local jurisdiction approval.
Additional Information:
Page 2-20
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 2
TESC Plan Design
Uncontaminated dewatering water is an authorized non-stormwater discharge under the Permit. If dewatering water comes into contact with pH-modifying substances, such a newly poured concrete foundation, as a result of natural flow, monitor pH levels to ensure high-pH water is not discharged. Follow the pH monitoring protocols outlined in Section 4-1.3.
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 10  Water pumps 5-1.1.49

 Temporary or mobile containment 5-1.1.43
Element 11: Maintain BMPs
Risks associated with this element may include failure to maintain BMPs as required to prevent sediment pollution from being discharged from the site.
The requirements for this element include: 
Maintain or replace all BMPs as needed to ensure continued performance or intended function. 
Remove all non-biodegradable temporary BMPs as soon as they are no longer needed and prior to submitting the Notice of Termination.
Additional Information:
Uncontaminated sediments removed from sediment control BMPs may be stabilized away from drainages in an onsite area approved by the Project Engineer.
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 11  Materials on hand 5-1.1.23  CESCL 5-1.1.3
Element 12: Manage the Project

Risks associated with this element include the failure to implement procedural requirements (e.g., site inspections, discharge sampling, BMP adaptive management, site documentation, contract requirements etc.).
The requirements for this element include: 
Soil exposure and covering timelines are in accordance with Division 8-01.3 of the Standard Specifications). 
Weekly site inspections are performed in accordance with Division 8-01.3 of the Standard Specifications. 
Weekly discharge sampling is performed in accordance with Section 4-1 and the Permit, and data is being reported to Ecology’s WebDMR system on time.
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 2-21 TESC Plan Design
Chapter 2 
Onsite BMPs are being maintained and adaptively managed as required to ensure continued performance. 
Maintain a site log book that contains records of the permit requirements (see Section 4-1.5).
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 12

 Materials on hand 5-1.1.23  CESCL 5-1.1.3  Scheduling and coordinating work activity 5-1.1.30
Element 13: Protect Low-Impact Development BMPs
Risks associated with this element may include the failure to protect LID BMPs from sedimentation or compaction.
The requirements for this element include: 
Protect low-impact development (LID) BMPs during construction activity to prevent impacts from sedimentation and soil compaction. 
If LID BMPs are impacted during construction, restore them to their original condition or design requirements.
Common LID BMPs (existing or installed during construction) that must be protected from construction activity include: 
FC.01 – Natural Dispersion 
FC.02 – Engineered Dispersion 
RT.02 – Compost-Amended Vegetated Filter Strips (CAVFS)


RT.04 – Continuous Inflow Compost-Amended Biofiltration Swale (CABS)
RT.07 – Media Filter Drain (MFD)
RT.08 – Bioretention Area
IN.01 – Bioinfiltration Pond (E. WA only) Natural Depression Storage
IN.02 – Infiltration Pond
IN.03 – Infiltration Trench
IN.04 – Infiltration Vault
IN.05 – Dry Well
Design requirements for the above-listed LID BMPs are outlined in Chapter 5 of the
Highway Runoff Manual.

Page 2-22
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 2
TESC Plan Design
COMMON BMPS USED FOR ELEMENT 13  High-visibility fencing 5-1.1.18  Compost socks 5-1.1.5  Silt fences 5-1.1.33  Buffer zones 5-1.1.2  Interceptor dikes and swales 5-1.1.20  Filter berms 5-1.1.15  Temporary curbs or water bars 5-1.1.42 2-1.3 Reviewing a TESC Plan
TESC plans should be reviewed internally using regional procedures before being included in a contract. TESC plans are not required to be stamped by a licensed engineer, though regional and project specific requirements may vary. A TESC plan review checklist is available on the Erosion Control Policies and Procedures website.
The contractor is required to either adopt and modify the WSDOT TESC plan or develop their own TESC plan in accordance with this Manual. The contractor’s TESC plan must be submitted as a Type 2 Working Drawing for review and comment in accordance with the contract. The final TESC plan must include the contractor’s schedule, method of construction, TESC implementation schedule, and offsite areas that will be used to directly support construction activity such as equipment staging yards, material storage areas, or borrow areas in accordance with S1.C.2 of the Permit.
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 2-23 Chapter 3 3-1
SPCC Plans
Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures Plan
A spill prevention control and countermeasures (SPCC) plan is required on all projects to prevent and minimize spills that may contaminate soil or nearby waters of the state. The contractor prepares the SPCC plan in accordance with Standard Specification 1-07.15 and submits the plan to the Project Engineer to be reviewed and accepted before starting onsite construction activities. The Hazardous Materials and Solid Waste
Program provides online guidance to contractors for preparing SPCC plans, and provides training to WSDOT staff on reviewing SPCC plans to ensure compliance.
SPCC plans are required to be project specific, adaptively managed to reflect site conditions, maintained onsite, and must ensure the contractor: 

Handles all pollutants in a manner that does not cause contamination of stormwater. 
Covers, contains, and protects all materials from vandalism so that, if spilled, the materials would not pose an immediate risk to waters of the state. 
Maintains and repairs heavy equipment using spill prevention measures such as drip pans and, if necessary, cover. 
Applies fertilizers and herbicides following manufacturers’ recommendations, to protect runoff water quality. 
Manages materials that modify pH, such as cementitious materials that contain
Portland cement, fly ash, kiln dust, and bottom ash.
General Special Provisions (GSPs) may be included in a contract for project specific pollution-prevention requirements (e.g., removal, containment, testing, and disposal requirements for contaminated soils or underground storage tanks). For additional
SPCC guidance, see:  www.wsdot.wa.gov/environment/hazmat/spillprevention.htm
Spill Response on WSDOT Construction Sites
In the event of a hazardous materials spill, release, or encounter by the contractor on a WSDOT construction site, personnel should notify the Project Engineer (PE) and refer to the SPCC plan for response activities. Refer to the Spill Reporting Flow Chart on the
Hazardous Materials Investigation, Sampling, & Documentation webpage for contact information and detailed instructions on how to report spills or manage hazardous materials. If the spill may pose a threat to human health or the environment, notify
Ecology immediately and submit a written report within 5 days in accordance with S5.f of the Permit.

WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 3-1 SPCC Plans
Chapter 3
When contractors encounter unknown preexisting contaminants or underground storage tanks, or cause a spill that may be a threat to human health or the environment, they must stop work in the immediate area and notify the PE. The PE must evaluate the situation and initiate required notifications to regulating authorities and ECAP reporting.
Page 3-2 Chapter 4 4-1
Construction Compliance
Managing Compliance
WSDOT staff play a key role in compliance when Permit coverage has been transferred to the contractor. Once Permit coverage has been transferred (specific date of transfer is the day after contract execution) the contractor becomes fully responsible for all
Permit requirements. WSDOT’s role becomes that of compliance assurance through inspection, documentation, contract enforcement and generally supporting the contractor’s compliance efforts by: 
Helping to identify compliance concerns and referencing the applicable Permit requirement(s) and/or contract requirement(s).


Verifying discharge sampling and reporting is being performed as required (have automatic notifications set up as described in Section 4-1.2 -Step 3).
Ensuring the contractor is tracking, resolving and documenting TESC adaptive management as required (e.g., using a BMP tracking table as required by the contract to resolve TESC issues within 10 days).
Ensuring appropriate BMP materials and installation methods are used (e.g., enforce Standard Specifications in Division 9-14 and Standard Plans).
Ensuring certified contractor personnel perform the weekly site inspections in accordance with Section 4-1.4 and Standard Specification 8-01.3.
Ensuring the site log book is being maintained as required (Section 4-1.5).
Documenting and elevating compliance issues (e.g., Inspector’s Daily Reports, initiating ECAP).
Ensuring additional environmental commitments made during the permitting process are being met (e.g., additional sampling requirements associated with outfalls in impaired waterbodies or site contamination).
Reviewing contractor prepared compliance related documents prior to Ecology submittal as required by the contract (e.g., Request for Chemical Treatment form, Notice of Intent modifications, Notice of Termination).
Collecting compliance verification discharge samples if appropriate (Section 41.6.10).


Providing insight on site management strategies (do not direct work).
Under the TOC process WSDOT inspectors are not responsible for weekly discharge sampling. However, WSDOT inspectors must continue to monitor construction activity and site conditions to help ensure contractor discharges are compliant, look for:
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-1 Chapter 4
Construction Compliance
Sources of pH modifying substance(s) or pH-affected stormwater.
New discharge points.
Sources of prohibited discharges outlined in S1.D of the Permit.
Potentially hazardous materials onsite not included in the SPCC plan.

4-1.1 Certified Erosion and Sediment Control Lead (CESCL)
All staff can visually monitor construction activities for potential compliance issues and collect discharge samples or compliance verification discharge samples. However, the
Permit required site inspections must be performed by a CESCL or a Certified
Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC). Contractors are required to provide certified personnel to perform the site inspections in accordance with Standard
Specification 8-01.3. Refer to Section 4-1.4 for more information about site inspections or BMP 5-1.1.3 for more information about the responsibilities of the CESCL. 4-1.2 Preconstruction Reporting Requirements and Preparation
Monthly Discharge Monitoring Report (DMR) submittal requirements begin as soon as the Permit is issued by Ecology, even if construction has not yet started or a discharge has not occurred. The following steps will help ensure: 
Preconstruction DMR submittals are not missed by WSDOT. 
A smooth transition when Permit coverage is transferred to the contractor. 
Projects are prepared for day one of construction.
Step 1

Track Permit issuance status and submit preconstruction DMRs
Under the TOC process standard for design-bid-build projects, WSDOT applies for Permit coverage and is the permittee until the Permit is transferred to the contractor.
Therefore, the project office must track the issuance status of the Permit to determine when coverage begins. Determining the Permit coverage start date usually happens in one of three ways: 
The Ecology Permit Administrator notifies the permittee (as identified on the
NOI) that Permit coverage has been issued. 
WSDOT staff use Ecology’s PARIS system to search for a project to see if Permit coverage was issued. 
The permittee receives a Permit coverage letter in the mail.
WSDOT project offices must submit the preconstruction DMRs until the Permit has been transferred to the contractor (the day after contract execution). To submit the preconstruction DMRs, delegated WSDOT staff (follow regional procedures) will use
Ecology’s WebDMR system to prepare, sign and submit a DMR. Refer to WSDOT’s
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02

Page 4-2 Construction Compliance
Chapter 4 internal guidance for the monthly DMR procedures on the Erosion Control internet page, under “Monthly Discharge Monitoring Reports (DMRs)”.
Step 2
Permit is transferred to the contractor
WSDOT uses procedural guidance for processing the TOC form, which can be found on the Erosion Control Policies & Procedures webpage under the “Transfer of Coverage (TOC)” section. The construction PE office will receive notification from the Contract
Administration and Payment Section (CAPS) office when the TOC form has been finalized and submitted to Ecology. Permit coverage is automatically transferred to the contractor on the specific date of transfer (the day after contract execution) as indicated on the completed TOC form submitted to Ecology. Additional information on how
Ecology implements the TOC process can be found in Section 4-1.6.15 for General
Condition 9.
The specific date of transfer triggers a change in roles and responsibilities associated with Permit compliance; the contractor becomes responsible for all Permit requirements and WSDOT’s role becomes that of compliance assurance through inspection, documentation and contract enforcement.
Contractor staff will need to register for WebDMR and begin submitting DMRs as soon as the Permit is transferred. Depending on the specific date of transfer, timing can be a challenge, so initiating their WebDMR registration effort as soon as possible is important (even before the transfer date if possible). It may be helpful for WSDOT staff to assist contractor staff(s) through the WebDMR registration and electronic signature account processes or connect them with the WebDMR technical support staff at Ecology.
Once contractor staff(s) are registered, WSDOT staff should request they set up automatic notifications in WebDMR to go to appropriate WSDOT staff when DMRs are submitted. This will help WSDOT staff track DMR submittal information to ensure it is occurring as required. This notification step is also covered in the “CSWGP Discharge
Monitoring Report Procedures” guidance doc listed under the DMR section of the
Erosion Control internet page.
Step 3

Prepare a site log book
The Permit requires a site log book be maintained onsite with specific documents (see
Section 4-1.5). The site log book must be available onsite on day one of construction. 4-1.3 Discharge Sampling and Reporting Requirements
Once ground disturbing construction begins discharge sampling becomes required at all discharge points that may be affected by construction. Sampling procedures for in-water work are not covered in this Manual but can be found in WSDOT’s Monitoring Guidance for In-Water Work document.
The Permit authorizes specific construction-related discharges to waters of the state, including stormwater and conditionally authorizes some uncontaminated non-
Page 4-3
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4
Construction Compliance stormwater sources such as potable water, groundwater, spring water, and dewatering water. Refer to S1.C of the Permit and Standard Specification 8-01.1 for definitions and general guidance on authorized and conditionally-authorized pH-affected discharges.
The Permit prohibits specific construction-related discharges to waters of the state, such as cementitious/concrete wastewater, process wastewater, pollutants and chemicals that may pose a threat to human health or the environment. Refer to S1.D of the Permit and Standard Specification Division 8-01.1 for definitions on prohibited pHaffected discharges.
Discharges must not cause or contribute to a violation of surface water quality health-based criteria in the National Toxics Rule (40 CFR Part 131.36). In accordance with Chapter 90.48 RCW, when the permittee fully complies with all
Permit requirements, compliance with the above regulations is presumed unless discharge sampling data or other information demonstrates otherwise. General discharge sampling procedures: 

Plan sampling efforts around the weather to ensure a sample is collected at every discharge point for each week in which a discharge occurs. 
Use collection devices as needed to collect representative samples (e.g., dust pan to collect sheet flows going into storm drains). 
Do not introduce pollutants (e.g., dirty equipment, sample vials or hands). 
Use appropriate and calibrated equipment. If sample value is suspect, measure it again or verify equipment calibration. 
Record sample values and relevant information about site conditions that may have impacted the sample value(s) in a field notebook (e.g., BMPs in area, weather, work in area, potential adaptive management strategies). 
Be aware of personal safety and changing site conditions such as new discharge locations.
Recommended field equipment: 
Clean collection devices and sample vials 
Calibrated turbidimeter and wide-range pH indicator paper 
Equipment cleaning supplies such as distilled water and glass wipes


Personal protective equipment, boots, rain gear
Camera and cell phone
Weather-proof field notebook and pencil
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-4 Construction Compliance
Chapter 4
Discharge sampling equipment:
Appropriate functional discharge sampling equipment for all parameters required to be evaluated must be onsite on day one of construction. Turbidity and pH are the most common parameters that need to be evaluated during construction. If the permitted outfalls (as identified on the NOI) are impaired for fine sediment or phosphorus these parameters are evaluated using turbidity as the surrogate. If site contamination exists, additional parameters may require sample evaluation (if Administrative Order applies). turbidity units (NTUs). Most hand-held turbidimeters that can be calibrated comply with this Method. Wide-range pH paper test strips can be used to sample pH-affected construction site discharges (use a pH meter for in-water work sampling required by a
401 Water Quality Certification).
WSDOT construction staff should periodically verify appropriate sampling equipment is being used by the contractor to ensure quality data is being collected and reported as required. It is recommended that project offices have sampling equipment on hand if there is a need to collect compliance verification discharge samples (see Section 41.6.10).
Follow the equipment manufacturers’ recommendations for operational and storage procedures. Most turbidimeters have a calibration verification procedure which is a quick way to verify equipment is still calibrated and ready to use. Full calibration may be needed on a regular basis, based on the results of a verification procedure, or if sample data appears suspect.
It is good practice to maintain an equipment calibration log. Keep the log in a convenient location (e.g., in the equipment case) so it can be updated and referred to as needed. General practices for keeping sampling equipment in working order are: 

Using non-expired primary calibration standards to calibrate equipment (note: these commonly expire annually) 
Verify equipment calibration prior to every use 
Cleaning sample vials with distilled water and glass-cleaning wipes 
Using proper storage and housekeeping methods 
Replacing glass sample vials if they appear scratched or damage 
Not exposing equipment or liquid standards to extreme temperatures 
Contacting product manufacturer for technical assistance
Discharge sampling is not required: 
Page 4-5
If ground disturbing work has not started in contributing areas draining to the discharge point

WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4
Construction Compliance 
At discharge points that drain fully stabilized areas (construction is complete and soils permanently stabilized). It is recommended that two weeks of discharge samples be collected before sampling is discontinued to verify and document that permanent stabilization methods are effective 
For discharges to a sanitary sewer system (See Section 4-1.6.9) 
When there is no discharge during a calendar week (“no discharge” must be reported in WebDMR) 
Outside normal working hours such as holidays, nights, and weekends 
During frozen or unsafe conditions (reason must be reported in WebDMR)
The following steps outline procedures for Permit required discharge sampling and reporting: 1. Designate Responsible Staff
All staff performing the discharge sampling required by the Permit must be capable of: 
Collecting and recording weekly discharge samples in the field and reporting data as required.


Following appropriate procedures for quality control including appropriate equipment use and calibration. 2. Discharge sampling frequency and reporting requirements
Discharge samples must be collected at all discharge points at least once every calendar week when stormwater or authorized non-stormwater discharges from the site or enters any onsite surface waters of the state.
Discharge Monitoring Reports (DMRs) for a given month are due the 15th of the following month. For example, January DMRs must be electronically signed and submitted in WebDMR no later than February 15th.
Discharge samples may need to be evaluated for different parameters (turbidity: see step 4, pH: see step 5). Discharge sampling frequency can be reduced to once a month on inactive sites (see Section 4-1.6.4). If discharge sampling is not conducted as required a reason must be provided in the DMR, some reasons are Permit violations (see Section 4-1.6.3). All permit requirements, including discharge sampling and DMRs, must continue until the permit is terminated (see Section 4-1.6).
Additional sampling and/or reporting requirements may be triggered for the following reasons:
A discharge 250 NTU or more (Special Condition S5.A of the Permit)
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-6 Construction Compliance
Chapter 4


Non-compliance event that may pose a threat to human health or the environment (Special Condition S5.F of the Permit)
Construction outfalls in waterbodies impaired for turbidity, fine sediment, high pH or phosphorus (See Section 4-1.6.7 for more information)
Administrative Order associated with site contamination 3. Establish sample location(s) at discharge point(s)
Sample locations must be established at all discharge points where stormwater or authorized non-stormwater may:
Discharge from the site
Enter surface waters of the state within the site (e.g., creek running through the site)
Enter a storm sewer system that drains to surface waters of the state
The sample location should be established as close to the point of discharge as possible to ensure samples will represent the quality of water leaving the construction site.
WSDOT’s construction projects are often long, linear projects with multiple drainage basins, active storm drains or stream crossings. Most large projects will have multiple discharge points, each of which require a sample location be established.
Establishing a sample location includes: 

Marking it in the field 
Marking it on the TESC plan sheets 
Adding a “monitoring point” to Ecology’s WebDMR system for monthly reporting purposes
Once construction begins and temporary grade changes, discharge points and therefore sample locations often change; they might go away or new ones might develop. Such changes require sample location updates be made in the field, on the
TESC plan sheets, and in WebDMR.
All discharges must go to permitted outfalls (as identified on the NOI). If a surface waterbody that may receive a discharge during construction was omitted on the NOI application, a new NOI must be submitted and a new public comment period may be required in accordance with G20 of the Permit before Ecology can permit that surface water to receive a discharge. 4. Evaluate turbidity
All discharge samples of stormwater and authorized non-stormwater must be evaluated for turbidity.
Page 4-7
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4
Construction Compliance

The turbidity benchmark value is 25 nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs), and the phone-reporting trigger value is 250 NTUs. These values are not effluent limits or water quality standards; they are indicators for BMP performance and as triggers for specific actions. Discharge samples are compared to these values to determine the level of required action: 
Discharges between 0 – 25 NTU indicate BMPs are functioning well and no additional action is needed beyond collecting and reporting the weekly sample. 
Discharges between 25.1 and 249.9 NTU indicate BMPs are not functioning as well as they should be and additional action is required (follow Step A below). 
Discharges of 250 NTU or greater indicate BMPs are not functioning and surface water quality impacts may occur and additional action is required (follow Steps A and B below).
A. Required follow-up actions for discharge samples > 25 NTU: i.
Review the TESC plan and make appropriate revisions to strategies or BMPs within 7 calendar days of the discharge that exceeded the benchmark. ii. Fully implement and maintain BMPs (adaptive management) as soon as possible, but within 10 calendar days of the discharge. If installation of
BMPs is not feasible within 10 calendar days, Ecology may approve additional time if an extension is requested within the initial 10-day response period. iii. Document BMP adaptive management in the site log book. iv. Report discharge sample data in WebDMR and include notes about adaptive management.
B. Required follow-up actions for discharge samples > 250 NTU: i.
Follow Step A above. ii. Ensure Ecology is notified via the Environmental Report Tracking
System (ERTS) within 24 hours of a discharge that is 250 NTU or more.
Failure to call the ERTS hotline is a violation. The person designated to make this call must follow the High Turbidity Reporting instructions on
Ecology’s website:  www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/wq/stormwater/construction/ iii. Continue to sample (follow-up sampling) the discharge daily until: 1. Turbidity is 25 NTU or lower; or

WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-8 Construction Compliance
Chapter 4 2. The discharge is confirmed as stopped or eliminated. 3. Compliance with the water quality limit for turbidity is demonstrated: a. No more than 5 NTU over background turbidity, if background is less than 50 NTU, or b. No more than 10% over background turbidity, if background is
50 NTU or greater.
Note for option 3: A background sample (upstream in-water) may be collected to document compliance with the water quality standard for turbidity, however a discharge point sample is still required to be collected for DMR purposes (the background sample is supplemental information).
Demonstrating compliance with the water quality standard for turbidity does not negate follow-up actions triggered by the discharge sample value. Not all projects will have access to the receiving water to collect a background sample – so this option is not applicable to all projects. Lifting a storm drain and sampling the water in the conveyance system does not constitute a background sample. Contact the Erosion Control program for assistance on where and when background sampling may be warranted. iv. Initiate the internal Environmental Compliance Assurance Procedure (ECAP) so the PE can review the event and determine if a Permit violation occurred.
If a Permit violation occurred, the ECAP must be completed. Information about the ECAP can be found in the Construction Manual, Section 1-2.2K. 5. Evaluate pH
Discharge samples of stormwater and conditionally authorized non-stormwater must be evaluated for pH if, over the life of the project, construction will:  incorporate 1,000 cubic yards or more of poured concrete or recycled concrete  incorporate any amount of engineered soils [e.g. Portland cement-treated base (CTB), cement kiln dust (CKD), or fly ash]
The benchmark value for pH is 8.5 standard units (su). Water outside the range of 6.5 – 8.5 su is not authorized to discharge.
Common pH-modifying substances used during construction include, but are not limited to:

Page 4-9 
Portland cement or recycled concrete 
Cementitious materials such as kiln dust, fly ash, bottom ash 
Engineered or amended soils
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4
Construction Compliance
Begin pH sampling at all potentially pH-impacted discharge points as soon as the pHmodifying substance is being incorporated and is exposed to precipitation.
Continue to evaluate the pH of discharge samples weekly: 
Throughout the concrete pour and curing period (Special Condition S4.D.1). 
Until the recycled concrete or engineered soil is fully stabilized (Special
Condition S4.D.2 and 3).

Managing pH affected sources of water: 
Prevent stormwater or authorized non-stormwater outside of the range of 6.5 - 8.5 su from discharging to waters of the state, including groundwater. 
Evaluate potentially pH-affected stormwater or authorized non-stormwater prior to a discharge. Do not report predischarge monitoring data in the DMR; only report discharge sample data. 
Neutralize pH-affected stormwater or authorized non-stormwater using approved methods (BMP 5-1.1.17) prior to a discharge. 
Evaluate and report pH data as required - even if the pH affected stormwater or authorized non-stormwater has been neutralized and is known to be in the range of 6.5 – 8.5 su prior to discharge. 
High pH process wastewater is not the same as pH-affected stormwater or authorized non-stormwater. Process wastewater cannot be discharged to surface waters even if it has been neutralized. Some process wastewater may be infiltrated when managed in accordance with the Permit.
Discharge sample pH evaluation can be discontinued at a discharge point when: 
All pH-modifying substances have been incorporated in the contributing drainage area and are thought to be adequately cured or fully stabilized. 
Two weeks of discharge samples have been collected and the samples are naturally compliant for pH (between 6.5 – 8.5 su without needing to be neutralized). 6. Report all discharge sample data
DMRs for a given month are due the 15th of the following month. A missed reporting deadline is a Permit violation. For every week at every discharge sample location, active construction projects must either: 

Report a discharge sample value, and:
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-10 Construction Compliance
Chapter 4 
If the sample value is over 25 NTU, include a note about BMP adaptive management. 
If the sample value is 250 NTU or higher, include a note clarifying whether the discharge stopped or was eliminated, or collect and report daily follow-up samples until the discharge is 25 NTU or less. 
Report “no discharge” if no discharge occurred for the week. 
Report a reason why samples were not collected (some reasons are Permit violations - See Section 4-1.6.3).
Monthly DMR procedure guidance is available on the Erosion Control program internet page. Ecology provides periodic training for the WebDMR system. 4-1.4 Site Inspections and TESC Plan Adaptive Management
Permit required site inspections must be performed by a person with a current CESCL or
CPESC. Site inspections on active construction projects must be done at a minimum of once per week and within 24 hours of discrete storm events that may have caused onsite erosion or a need to maintain onsite BMPs. Refer to Section 4-1.6 for inspection procedures on temporarily inactive sites.
Site inspections shall be performed in accordance with Standard Specification 8-01.3 and include all: 

Areas disturbed by construction activities 
Onsite BMPs 
Discharge points
TESC Plan Adaptive Management
Adaptive management is a recurring decision making and plan implementation process used to manage changing site conditions and risks. There are three common triggers for
TESC plan or BMP adaptive management: 
Visual monitoring or site inspection findings that indicate BMPs are not performing as required (e.g., signs of erosion, sediment filled BMPs) 
A change in work activity, site conditions, schedule, or design that impact erosion related risk(s) 
A discharge sample over 25 NTU (see Section 4-1.3)
The onsite TESC plan must be updated regularly to reflect current site conditions and
TESC plan or BMP adaptive management efforts. Adaptive management must be documented onsite in a way that shows identified problems are resolved within 10 days.
Ecology may approve additional time if an extension is requested within the initial 10day timeframe.

Page 4-11
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4
Construction Compliance 4-1.5 Site Log Book
Large projects may need several site log books to contain all of the information required to be kept onsite. Ensure the site log book(s) are organized so information can be located easily. Site log book information may be kept electronically, but must be accessible onsite.
The on-site log book must include the following items: 
Permit coverage issuance letter or completed Transfer of Coverage (TOC) form 
Updated TESC plan, SPCC plan, other related plans (e.g., chemical treatment plan) 
Discharge sampling data 
Site inspection reports 
Documentation of BMP adaptive management


Contact information for onsite CESCL(s) who perform site inspections
Other Permit related documents or approvals (e.g., sanitary sewer permit,
Administrative Order, approval for use of chemical treatment) 4-1.6 Miscellaneous Procedures and Compliance-Related Issues 4-1.6.1
Non-compliance Events and Permit Violations
Noncompliant events occur when the project fails to meet a law, ordinance, regulation or specific Permit requirement. Even when Permit coverage has been transferred, WSDOT can be held liable for non-compliance events, which is why it is important to inspect the contractor’s TESC related work and document contract enforcement and compliance assurance efforts.
Noncompliant events may include, but are not limited to:
Failure to collect and report weekly discharge samples as required.
High-pH discharges (failure to neutralize prior to discharge).
Failure to perform required follow-up actions based on discharge samples (e.g., BMP adaptive management, daily follow-up sampling).


Failure to call the ERTS hotline within 24 hours of a discharge > 250 NTU.
Discharge to a surface water not covered by the issued Permit.
Prohibited discharges or spills of hazardous material.
Notification from Ecology that a permit violation has occurred.
Exceedances of numeric effluent limits for impaired water bodies.
Unauthorized impacts to a wetland.
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-12 Construction Compliance
Chapter 4

If a noncompliant event may pose a threat to human health or the environment,
Ecology must be notified immediately (within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event) and a written report must be submitted to Ecology within 5 calendar days unless a report waiver was given (per Special Condition S5.f of the Permit).
An event that may pose a threat to human health or the environment includes, but is not limited to: 4-1.6.2 
Spills of fuels or toxic materials that cannot be readily cleaned up with the onsite spill kit. 
Large erosion events (e.g. pond or slope failure) that discharge significant amounts of sediment to fish-bearing surface waters or tributaries to fishbearing surface waters. 
Discharges that cause violations of surface or groundwater quality standards. 
Exceedance of numeric effluent limit to impaired waterbodies.
Environmental Compliance Assurance Procedure (ECAP)
The ECAP is an internal procedure for recognizing and rectifying environmental noncompliance events during construction. WSDOT and contractor staffs shall immediately notify the PE when a suspected noncompliant event is identified (i.e., notification trigger observed). Refer to the Construction Manual, Section 1-07.5(3), for ECAP procedure information including the complete list of notification triggers.
Initiating ECAP helps determine what happened and why, whether a noncompliance event actually occurred, who needs to be notified and how the issue will be resolved and prevented in the future. Initiating the ECAP process does not necessarily mean a non-compliant event occurred and final ECAP documentation will be required. The PE and Regional Environmental Manager (REM) will work together on an appropriate response to the notification trigger.
When the Permit has been transferred and the ECAP is triggered, the contractor must fill out the ECAP form (WSDOT form #422-011) and provide it to Project
Engineer within 48 hours of the non-compliance event. ECAP information should be entered into Commitment Tracking System (CTS) even if Permit coverage has been transferred. 4-1.6.3

Discharge Sampling Not Conducted
If a discharge sample was not collected for a week in which a discharge did occur, the Permit requires that an explanation be provided in the monthly DMR. The
Permit defines acceptable reasons for not collecting discharge samples in Special
Condition S4.C. (e.g., discharge occurred outside of normal working hours, unsafe or frozen conditions). Reasons attributed to negligence are non-compliance events.
Page 4-13
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4 4-1.6.4
Construction Compliance
Temporarily Stabilized Inactive Sites and Projects in Winter Shutdown
The Permit makes a distinction between temporary stabilization and final stabilization. Construction sites or drainage areas within a site are temporarily stabilized when all erodible soils have been covered with properly installed temporary erosion control BMPs and no soil disturbing work is taking place.
Construction sites or drainage areas within a site that have been temporarily stabilized for winter shutdown or periods of inactivity may reduce site inspections and discharge sampling to once a month instead of weekly per Special Condition
S4.B.2 and S4.C.2.g of the Permit respectively. All other Permit requirements remain the same. For example, adaptive management is required if it becomes evident that onsite BMPs have become ineffective at preventing erosion or providing treatment prior to a discharge. 4-1.6.5

Final Stabilization and Notice of Termination
Final stabilization is achieved when all construction is complete, all nonbiodegradable temporary BMPs (e.g., fencing, plastic, inlet socks) have been removed, and all erodible soils have been fully stabilized with permanent BMPs (e.g., vegetative cover, rock, concrete). BMPs designed to be left in place and biodegrade do not need to be removed if they will not interfere with WSDOT maintenance activity such as mowing or other land use needs. Some BMP products may be advertised as using “biodegradable plastic” but the science and long-term impact to the environment is debatable. To help ensure products commonly left in place after construction (e.g., compost socks, erosion control blankets) will degrade safely into the environment, several of the Division 9-14 specifications require products be made of natural plant fibers.
Once Physical Completion has been given, the contractor will submit a Notice of
Termination (NOT) to the PE for review prior to submitting it to Ecology. WSDOT staff should walk the site to ensure the NOT requirements in Special Condition S10 of the Permit have been met. If requirements have not been met, the NOT should not be submitted to Ecology. Prematurely submitting the NOT is a Permit violation. If the site has not achieved final stabilization, all other contract work is complete, and the project is “waiting for grass to grow”, the contractor may request to transfer the
Permit back to WSDOT in accordance with the contract. If the Permit is transferred back to WSDOT (at the PE’s discretion), the project office becomes fully responsible for Permit compliance including site inspections, discharge sampling, and reporting until the Permit is terminated.
Once a NOT is submitted, Ecology may request a site visit or notify the permittee that the termination request is denied. If no contact is made by Ecology, the Permit is considered terminated the 31st calendar day after the date Ecology received the
NOT form.
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-14 Construction Compliance
Chapter 4

All Permit requirements, including sampling and reporting, must continue until the permit is terminated. Projects should check the status of a Permit (inactive status indicates terminated coverage) in Ecology’s PARIS system. If the Permit status is active in PARIS, monthly DMR requirements will continue to generate in WebDMR.
Therefore, it is recommended that the permittee (WSDOT or the contractor) followup with the Ecology permit administrator as needed to ensure terminated Permits have been inactivated in PARIS. 4-1.6.6
In-Water Work
Upstream and downstream sample data collected during in-water work projects covered by a 401 Individual Water Quality Certification must be reported directly to the certifying agency by the project office staff; do not report in-water work data into the Discharge Monitoring Report (DMR) associated with the Permit.
Division 8-01 includes some contract language for in-water work; however Special
Provisions are often necessary to cover project specific work. Check the Index for the
General Special Provisions, as the Environmental Services Office Compliance
Program is routinely adding contract language for new environmental commitments.
For guidance on in-water work [401 certifications or a Letter of Verification (LOV)] or creating Water Quality Monitoring Pollution Prevention (WQMPP) Plans, refer to
WSDOT’s Monitoring Guidance for In-Water Work document or the Environmental
Commitments & Compliance webpage. 4-1.6.7

Impaired Receiving Waters
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) requires states to prepare a list of impaired water bodies that fail to meet water quality standards for their designated uses (e.g., recreation, drinking, fish spawning etc.). Each waterbody reach (hydrologic segment) that fails to meet water quality standards is added to the Water Quality Assessment list as a Category 5 reach. The list of impaired reaches in Category 5 is known as the 303(d) list. Once 303(d) listed, Ecology must develop a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) or an alternative strategy to address the water quality impairment at the watershed level. In Washington State, Ecology develops the 303(d) list and TMDLs and the Environmental Protection Agency is the approving authority.
TMDLs attempt to calculate the maximum amount of a pollutant (load) that a waterbody can receive and still meet water quality standards. The TMDL allocates the pollutant load among the various sources of the pollutant(s) within the watershed. WSDOT participates in TMDL development when WSDOT facilities have been identified as a potential source of the pollutant.
Impaired waterbodies [303(d) listed or approved TMDL] may have implications for projects from the scoping phase all the way through maintenance and operations.
The Environmental Review Summary (ERS) database helps ensure applicable waterbody impairments are identified early in the scoping/planning process. This is
Page 4-15
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4
Construction Compliance important because additional actions or planning procedures may be triggered by waterbody impairments. For example, some TMDLs prohibit construction related discharges (e.g. Wapato Lake and Cottage Lake) which could increase TESC costs substantially.
For the purposes of the Permit, projects with construction outfall location(s) in a surface waterbody (as identified on the NOI) impaired for turbidity, fine sediment, phosphorus, or high pH the project will be required to: 4-1.6.8 
Submit the Proposed New Discharge to an Impaired Waterbody form during the NOI permitting process. Any environmental commitments made on this form must be incorporated into the TESC plan or contract. The Permit coverage letter will include information about additional sampling requirements for discharges to impaired receiving waters, but WSDOT staff should help ensure contractors understand impairment discharge sampling requirements prior to construction. Guidance on using the GIS Workbench to identify waterbody impairments and filling out the Proposed New Discharge to an Impaired Waterbody form is available on the Erosion Control Policies &
Procedures webpage.


Sample discharges in accordance with Special Condition S8.
Construction Projects Not Covered by the Permit
Projects not required to obtain Permit coverage must comply with all Federal, State, tribal, or local laws, ordinances, and regulations that affect work in accordance with
Standard Specification 1-07.1. Washington State laws and regulations as codified in the Washington Administrative Code (WAC) and the Revised Code of Washington (RCW) provide specific requirements related to the protection of waters of the state (Chapter 173-201A WAC, Chapter 173-200, and Chapter 90.48 RCW).
An abbreviated TESC plan is required for projects that disturb soil and have the potential to discharge (refer to Section 2-1). While contract plan sheets are not required with an abbreviated TESC plan, they may help ensure the contractor understands where BMP placement is needed to protect waters of the state.
WSDOT project engineers and staff shall enforce contract language that directs contractors on erosion and water pollution control requirements found in Sections 1-07 and 8-01 of the Standard Specifications.
When projects are not covered by a Permit, take measures to minimize discharges and prevent discharges wherever feasible. If discharges cannot be prevented, ensure they are managed to prevent impacts to waters of the state and conduct monitoring. If evidence suggests a compliance issue (e.g. a turbidity plume, oil sheen) in the receiving water, adapt the site controls or management practices immediately to eliminate the source of pollution.
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02
Page 4-16

Construction Compliance 4-1.6.9
Chapter 4
Discharges to a Sanitary Sewer
Discharges to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) commonly referred to as a sanitary sewer system are not covered by the Permit. Approval must be granted by the jurisdictional operator prior to discharging to a sanitary sewer system. The jurisdiction may issue a Special Approved Discharge (SAD) Permit which will likely include discharge sampling and reporting requirements. Report data directly to the jurisdiction as required by the SAD Permit; do not report sanitary sewer discharge data into Ecology’s WebDMR system. Jurisdictional procedures vary. 4-1.6.10
Compliance Verification Sampling
WSDOT inspectors shall collect compliance verification discharge samples when noncompliance is suspected and the contractor is not taking required action. For example, if a discharge appears turbid (i.e., > 25 NTU) and the contractor is either reporting non-turbid sample data or not taking required follow-up actions (e.g., BMP adaptive management). Compliance verification discharge samples shall not be used by WSDOT as a reason to direct work but can be used to enforce the contract or initiate ECAP. 4-1.6.11
Non-Transfer of Coverage and Design Build Projects
The Assistant State Construction Engineer (ASCE) may allow a design-bid-build project to forgo the TOC process and for WSDOT to retain Permit coverage during construction (non-transfer). In a non-transfer, WSDOT remains the permittee and is responsible for all Permit requirements including discharge sampling and the monthly DMR submittal to Ecology’s WebDMR system. The contractor will identify an ESC Lead in accordance with 8-01.3(1)B to perform the Permit required site inspections.
Design-build projects use Request for Proposals (RFPs) to advertise projects. It is standard practice to require the contractor to obtain the Permit and develop the
TESC plan for WSDOT review and acceptance. 4-1.6.12

Permit Coverage on Projects Under an Acre
Some projects may choose to obtain coverage for various reasons including proximity to surface waters and perceived risk. Permit coverage helps define site management expectations that may lower environmental risk. However, the Permit does not require these projects to collect samples or have a CESCL perform weekly site inspections (though weekly site inspections are still required). Because sampling is not required, DMRs are not required, and therefore Ecology will not enter these projects into their WebDMR reporting system. If the WSDOT projects want to require discharge sampling on these projects, those expectations must be included in the contract.
Page 4-17
WSDOT Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Manual M 3109.02 Chapter 4 4-1.6.13
Construction Compliance
Emergency Projects
Ecology uses the federal expectations as outlined in the EPA’s Construction General
Permit for emergency-related projects. Emergency projects require immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment, public safety, or to reestablish public services. Such projects are authorized to discharge on the condition that a complete and accurate NOI is submitted within 30 calendar days after commencing earth-disturbing activities.
Ecology’s Regional Permit Administrators should be contacted as soon as possible as their project specific expectations may vary.
WSDOT’s emergency projects should operate as if covered under a Permit, including collecting discharge samples as soon as earth-disturbing work begins (document sample data onsite until a Permit is issued and data can be reported in WebDMR).
No TESC plan is required; the project shall use the other site log book documentation requirements (e.g. record of implementation of Permit requirements such as the site inspections and adaptive management of BMPs) to meet the pollution prevention intent of a TESC plan. 4-1.6.14

Using Existing Drainage Structures for TESC
Using existing drainage structures for TESC is potentially