g shall be permitted, except where parking has been limited by date and time and such limitations and restrictions have been approved by city ordinance or county resolution and the Regional Administrator (RCW 46.61.570(2). The Rules of the Road, (RCW 46.61.560 through 46.61.590) provide specific parking restrictions that are effective at all times along public roadways. When the region considers additional parking restrictions, conduct an engineering and traffic investigation to determine the need.
Administrator as a Calendar Agenda item. Include: • A detailed strip map of the area showing SR/MP, intersecting streets, and driveways, and other on-street or off-street parking alternatives. • Photos or video if available. • The type of restriction requested (i.e., time of day, mid-block to corner). • An analysis of operational conditions, such as narrow shoulders or limited sight distances that identify the need for the regulation. • Copies of a city or town ordinance, as required for city streets which are part of state highways. • Correspondence or comments regarding adjacent property and business owners’ parking. • Copies of WSP and/or local police agency concurrences.
H.
No Parking and No Parking Tow‑Away Zones along Freeways – WSDOT has the authority to restrict parking and place official traffic control devices prohibiting, limiting and restricting the stopping, standing or parking RCW 46.61.575. “No Parking” restrictions are appropriate at locations where operationally parked vehicles may block sight distance or pose a hazard.
On a limited access facility, it shall be unlawful for any person stop or park a vehicle within the right of way, including the shoulders, except at locations where signing specifically allows such stopping and parking RCW 47.52.120.
A “No Parking/Tow Away Zone” along a freeway may be established where there is an operational problem or collision history associated with vehicles parked on the shoulder. The WSP typically identifies these suggested locations.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 6-7 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations

When “Tow Away Zones” are required in addition to the “No Parking”, officers have the ability to promptly remove an unattended vehicle from a roadway shoulder if it constitutes an obstruction or jeopardizes public safety (RCW 46.55.113(2)(b)). The “no parking/tow-away zone” traffic regulation and related signing provide additional information for the motorist and an effective enforcement tool for the WSP.
Submit the proposed regulation to the Regional Administrator as a Calendar Agenda item. Include: • A detailed strip map of the area showing SR/MP, direction of traffic, roadway approaches and interchanges. • An analysis of operational conditions, roadway speed limit, including crashes associated with vehicles parked on the shoulder, narrow shoulders, or limited sight distances. • Parking restrictions in Rest Areas are approved by the State Traffic Engineer. • Copies of WSP and/or local police agency request and concurrence.
I.
Prohibitions of Fishing or Jumping from Bridges – Prohibitions of fishing or jumping from bridges are intended to alleviate injuries from distraction, jumping and person actions that might create unexpected conditions. An engineering and traffic investigation is conducted to determine the need for the prohibition.
Document the investigation and submit the proposed regulation to the Regional
Administrator as a Calendar Agenda item. Include: • A vicinity map showing the SR/MP of the bridge and the bridge number from the
Bridge List M 23-09. • A brief description of the conditions requiring the prohibition. • Copies of public or local agency correspondence. • Copies of WSP and/or local police agency concurrences.
There are a number of ‘fishing from bridges’ prohibitions that were adopted by the former Highway Commission, prior to traffic regulation authority being transferred to the department. The prohibitions remain effective unless rescinded by the
Regional Administrator.
J.

Highway Restrictions or Closures – Emergency, Temporary, Construction, or Weight
Related – The Regional Administrator approves emergency, temporary, construction, or weight related restrictions or closures. These place specific limitations on the use of a state highway. Examples are:
Emergency Closures or Restrictions: Emergency closures or restrictions may be implemented immediately, without prior notice or posting, in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 1 of the Maintenance Manual M 51-01. The Maintenance
Manual provides signing guidelines for emergency and non-emergency closures and restrictions.
Temporary or Construction Restrictions or Closures: RCW 47.48.010 gives the department the authority to close highways or segments of highways to all vehicles or any class of vehicles where such continued use will damage the roadway or be dangerous to traffic.
Page 6-8
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6
Investigate and document: • Document the conditions that require the restriction or regulation. • Detour accessibility options and emergency response contingency plan. • Internal WSDOT division correspondence, if any. • Copies of public or local agency correspondence. • Copies of WSP and local police agency concurrences.
Submit the proposed regulation to the Regional Administrator as a Calendar Agenda item. Include: • A vicinity map of area including SR/MP. • A discussion of roadway condition or situation that requires the restriction or closure. • Detour map, if available. • Copies of WSP, emergency response and local police agency concurrence. • Prior to restricting or closing a roadway segment, notice of the action must be given (per RCW 47.48.020) by:
Publishing a notice describing the restriction or closure in at least one newspaper issue of general circulation in the county, city, or town where the highway is located.
Posting a notice describing the restriction or closure in a conspicuous place at the ends of the highway or highway section.
It is important to remember state highway closures, unless it is under emergency conditions, require a three-day publication and posting a notice of closure, before the highway may be closed.
If the closure will be in effect for less than 12 hours (such as for many Special Events) it is not necessary to post a notice in a newspaper. Advance closure notices must still be posted on the highway. The Special Event Letter of Agreement is sufficient documentation of an event related restriction or closure.
Weight Restrictions: In accordance with WAC 468-38-080, temporary weight restrictions may be immediately imposed on highways in response to emergency road conditions, such as potential damage from freeze/thaw action.
The State Traffic Engineer approves permanent weight restrictions on bridge structures where posting is necessary due to deterioration of the structure. The Bridge and
Structures office typically initiates the restriction.
Oversize Load Restrictions: Notices of any roadway restriction or closure must be distributed to the Commercial Vehicle Services Office and signs must be installed by region maintenance that identify the milepost limits and the duration of the restriction.
The Commercial Vehicle Services Office issues the oversize load permits and should be made aware of any restrictions or closures along state highways. Some restriction may require pilot cars to accompany these loads (WAC 468-38).

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 6-9 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations
K.
Midblock Pedestrian Crossings on State Highways – The Regional Administrator may delegate the authority to the Region Traffic Engineer to approve midblock pedestrian crossing installations.
Chapter 4 Multi-Modal Design includes design guidance. Conditions that might increase the value of a midblock crossing includes the following: • High pedestrian crossing present. • Long block spacing. • Opportunity to channel multiple pedestrian crossings to a single location. • Visible crossing for pedestrians and motorists. • Local agency support. • Pedestrian traffic generator within vicinity of crossing. (e.g. transit stop, shopping, and high-density housing).
A traffic engineering study shall be submitted to the Region Traffic Engineer for approval by the project manager. If approved by the Regional Traffic Engineer, they shall forward the proposed crossing request to the Regional Administrator as a
Calendar Action agenda item. Request should include: • A vicinity map of the area showing proposed crossing along with pedestrian generators. • Traffic volumes. • Crash history for the past three years including any pedestrian involvements. • Summary statement detailing need for crossing. 6-4
Headquarters Traffic Regulations
Some types of traffic regulations address conditions that have statewide implications.
To assure uniformity, these are approved by the State Traffic Engineer, and include the following:
A.

Regulating Speed Limits
Speed limits are set to be the speed that is least likely to result in traffic fatalities and serious injuries and achieve compliance by the majority of drivers. In some cases, this will involve setting iterative speed limits over time until physical and psychological conditions can be changed to influence driver speed.
Speed limits frame expectations for drivers and other roadway users. Properly set speed limits should result in predictable, consistent, and reasonable vehicle speeds that consider the mobility, safety, accessibility and convenience for all users, including drivers, transit operations, pedestrians, and bicyclists.
Roadway context (current and planned future), changing development, transit, and bicycle and pedestrian facilities and activity, are all significant factors that need to be considered in addition to the traditional engineering study. There may be instances where the study may include a more in-depth review of speed limits in population centers for roads through and adjacent to residential and business districts.
Page 6-10
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6
The objective of speed zoning is to achieve operating speeds that minimize fatal and serious injuries for all road users and provide statewide consistency.
Review and Approval of New Speed Zones:
The Secretary of Transportation has delegated approving authority to the State Traffic
Engineer to authorize the establishment of speed limits. Region Traffic Operations divisions are responsible for performing the engineering/traffic analysis, context and multimodal user investigation needed to determine the most desirable operating speeds and implementing changes necessary.
Region Traffic offices may receive requests to reduce or increase speed limits from local agencies, tribal governments, citizen groups, developers, and law enforcement agencies. However, before the investigation begins, it is important to discuss the possible outcome of the review to ensure the requestor understands how WSDOT evaluates and sets speed limits. This is a good time to determine milepost limits of the speed zone request. It is also important to consider other roadway, user, and context changes in addition to speed zoning to address the underlying reason for the request.
Speed zoning is often not as effective as other speed management solutions but is often looked to as the easiest and cheapest solution by requestors. 1.

Engineering and Traffic Investigation: RCW 46.61.410 and RCW 46.61.405 authorize the secretary to Transportation to increase or decrease the speed limit based on an engineering and traffic investigation. The Region Traffic offices shall conduct an engineering and traffic investigation when determining the appropriate speed limit. WAC 468-95-045 modifies the MUTCD 2B.13 and provides guidance related to what is included in an engineering study. Weather, road surface conditions, or congestion may impact a proper investigation.
The following are factors that are considered: a)
Roadway Characteristics and Roadway Users – Consider roadway characteristics of the proposed segment, adjacent transitional speed zones, existing traffic control devices, roadway facilities and condition, and traffic generating activity (for all user types) within and adjacent to the proposed speed zone. Key roadway factors to consider: • Roadway alignment may dictate operational speed due to curvature of the roadway. A time travel speed review may be useful in making the determination. • Roadway facilities for all user types, including vehicle travel lanes/ widths, on-street parking, transit facilities, pedestrian and bicycle facilities, sidewalks. • Operational devices for all user types including signalized intersections, controlled/uncontrolled pedestrian/bicycle crossings, speed feedback signs, special signing, etc. • Route continuity should be reviewed. Verify the proposed segment has similar characteristics as adjacent or near-by speed zones. Where applicable, review and potentially revise adjacent speed zones.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 6-11 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations • Future changes in, or plans for, roadside development, private and public access points within the segment may influence driver behavior. • Pedestrian and bicycle activity and accessibility, existing and projected; school zone, transit, rail, parks, and urban development may influence driver behavior. Research nearby pedestrian and bicycle traffic generators. Multimodal paths, sidewalks, or trails may influence driver behavior. Please consider path location, path width, and demand of active transportation users. A multimodal LOS performance measurement may be useful in urban/suburban developed environments when required information is available. b)
Speed Studies – Speed studies are used to evaluate how the drivers are currently operating along the roadway. Speed studies should be conducted during non-peak hours, away from intersections, signalized locations, noninclement weather, and outside of curves. When possible, a minimum of
100 free-flowing vehicles should be sampled. Roadways less than 1000
ADT, 30 free-flowing vehicles should be sampled. Depending on length of proposed speed zone segment, several locations may be used to conduct speed studies.
Most drivers will select a speed at which they believe is safe and reasonable based upon their perception of the roadway. In consideration of the actual speeds on a particular roadway, WSDOT considers two speed measures and they are: • 85th percentile speed: the 85th percentile is the speed at or below
85 percent of vehicles travel under free-flowing conditions • 10 mph pace: the 10-mph pace is the range of speed at which the majority of cars are traveling on a particular stretch of road
WSDOT places an emphasis on the pace speed over the 85th percentile speed when considering speed limit changes.
Where operating speeds are high, other speed management techniques may be necessary.

c)
Crash History – Crashes resulting in fatalities and serious injuries are the most important crash types to consider. Analyze crashes to determine potential causes or patterns. Evaluate if a reduced speed limit would change the number or the severity of crashes. The following information should be considered: • Review the most recent three years of crash history. • If there are areas of concentrated crashes and the operating speed is consistent with the posted speed, verify a speed change is the preferred solution. The preferred solution may be independent of a speed limit change, or addition to.
Page 6-12
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6
Consider if other solutions besides speed limit changes are feasible to address crash history. Crashes involving tailgating, illegal passing, or other aggressive behaviors may be associated with speed differentials and may also be considered.
Communication and a field review with local law enforcement and the
Washington State Patrol is beneficial.
Crash history may be used to determine system-wide changes to prevent crashes proactively in similar locations. d)

Traffic Conditions: The type and number of users along the roadway (includes passenger vehicles, trucks, busses, pedestrians, bicycles) all have an influence on driver speed selection. Drivers also adjust their speed for temporary conditions unrelated to volumes of all user types. These conditions may be point or segment occurrences (such as access points), and influence driver speeds for varying durations and distances. The recurrence of these conditions should be considered in determining the regulatory speed for the segment, particularly for segments that present difficulties in measuring free-flow speeds. The use of temporary advisory speeds may also be a suitable treatment. These influences may include: • Roadside development. Increased levels of roadside development and access may lead to the potential for more traffic conflicts because of ingress and egress, turning movements, transit use, bicycle, and pedestrian activity. • Locations where seasonal and other peak events occur that may impact traffic. • Highways with limited locations for law enforcement to set up enforcement or pull a motorist over. • Locations with increased pedestrian or bicycle presence. • Increase or decrease in AM/PM Peak Travel Times. • Increase or decrease in ADT’s. • Venues that generate increased traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Also, ferry, rail and transit terminals may influence traffic. • Truck volumes.
Preliminary Review and Consideration: Where speed zone changes are justified, submit a preliminary speed zone request to the Headquarters Traffic
Office for preliminary approval. Include the following: • Proposed SR and Milepost, existing speed limit and proposed speed limit. • Include a summary as it relates to your engineering investigation and include: – Speed studies, crash history, recent or future construction projects. – Communication outreach. – Multimodal considerations. – Other contributing information supporting the change in speed limit.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 6-13 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations • Proposed traffic calming mitigation, for example: – Driver feedback signing, no pass striping, geometric changes. – Other traffic calming or speed management measures.
There are several benefits in conducting preliminary discussions with the Headquarters Traffic office. The Headquarters Regulations Specialist can assist regions with package preparation and provide guidance and recommendations on speed mitigation. 2.
Full Package Submittal Calendar Agenda Action: Regional Traffic offices will submit a full package speed zone request to the State Traffic Engineer as a
Calendar Agenda Action item (Figure 6-2). The submittal shall include: a)

Cover Memo from Regional Traffic Engineer or Regional Administrator, to the State Traffic Engineer: • Summarize the traffic investigation to include reasons for the change and who initiated the request. Include decisions from preliminary
Headquarters review. • Include pedestrian, bicycle, transit and community interest and benefits, if applicable. • Include state route, existing begin and end speed zone mileposts, and posted speed limit and proposed begin and end mileposts and proposed speed limit. • If the zone is located within the city/town limits or vicinity, include city/ town name. • Include previously tried corrective speed reducing measures and results.
When applicable, include the roadway characteristics, geometrics, condition, grade, and sight distance, etc. b)
Vicinity Map Showing • State route, mileposts, city limit boundary (if applicable), speed study milepost locations and results; including 10 MPH Pace and 85th percentile speeds. • Show existing speed zone boundary, adjacent speed zones, and proposed speed zone. • Identify roadway, context and user characteristics that are used for justification. For example, include trail crossings. • The map should be readable and may include satellite imagery. c)
Crash History • Include three (3) years of the most current crash history. Include only the crash summary.
Page 6-14
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6 d)
Local Agency Concurrence • A copy of the local agency ordinance or resolution is required for changes to speed limits within incorporated cities or towns. • Highways that are fully controlled limited access do not require a city ordinance, however, it is important to include documentation of local agency communication and understanding. • The Washington State Patrol concurrence at the Lieutenant level or higher. • Speed Limit Request Checklist (Figure 6-4).

e)
Other Documentation • An environmental review of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) if the proposed speed limit is being raised to above 55 MPH. • If applicable, a narrative on how tribal considerations is addressed, see environmental review process.
When the engineering and traffic investigation does not support a speed limit revision; implement other potential corrective measures, such as traffic calming/ speed management revisions, warning signs, and public information campaigns.
Observe and document the results of these measures before submitting a speed zone proposal. • The State Traffic Regulations Specialist maintains a statewide speed limit inventory. 3.
Speed Limits for Schools and Playgrounds – State law includes two parts to address reduced 20 mph speed zones for schools or playgrounds. A Calendar
Agenda Action is not required to approve school speed zones when following the criteria in RCW 46.61.440 as noted below. If the proposed school speed zone segment extends beyond the 300 feet, a Calendar Agenda Action approval by the
State Traffic Engineer is required.
PART 1: RCW 46.61.440(1) establishes a 20 mph speed zone at a marked school or playground crosswalk when the marked crosswalk is posted with standard school speed limit or playground speed limit signing.
PART 2: RCW 46.61.440(2) allows a county or incorporated city or town to establish a 20 mph speed zone on a roadway bordering a marked school or playground. The speed zone may only include area consistent with active school or playground use.
Part 1 establishes a 20 mph speed zone at a marked school or playground crosswalk, when the crosswalk is posted with standard school or playground signs.
School or playground crosswalk speed zones are addressed in WAC 468-95330 and WAC 468-95-340 and discussed in Chapter 2 – Signing. School speed zone signing is shown in Chapter 2. School Speed Limit assembly shall consist of a top plaque SCHOOL legend, a Speed Limit sign, and a bottom plaque may indicate; specific time periods of the day and/or days of the week, or the term
When Flashing, is used to notify motorist when the school speed limit is in effect.

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 6-15 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations
To increase visibility, these signs may be supplemented with a flashing beacon or flags to increase compliance with the speed zone may be considered.
The 20 mph speed zone shall extend a full 300 feet in either direction from the marked school or playground crosswalk unless there is less than 300 feet to the terminus of the roadway. School or playground speed zones established under this law do not require a traffic regulation.
There may be locations where the 20 mph speed zone may extend more than
300 feet from the crosswalk, however, the distance beyond 300 feet requires a traffic regulation based on an engineering and traffic investigation. This regulation is approved by the State Traffic Engineer.
For city streets that are also state highways, the department must approve the city ordinance that extends the school or playground speed limit (RCW 47.24.020(11) and RCW 46.61.415(5)).
Where school crosswalks serve an elementary school, the engineering and traffic investigation should consider the school’s Walk Route Plan. The Superintendent of Public Instruction limits the number of school crossings and allows only one entrance-exit from each block to and from the school.
Part 2 allows a county or incorporated city or town to establish a 20 mph speed zone adjacent to and extending up to 300 feet beyond the border of a school or playground property. The zone may only include the area consistent with active school or playground use (WAC 468-95-330). A marked crosswalk is not necessary to establish a 20 mph speed zone under RCW 46.61.440(2).
300 feet from the border of a school or playground property, however, the distance beyond 300 feet requires a traffic regulation based on an engineering and traffic investigation. This regulation is approved by the State Traffic Engineer.
For city streets that are also state highways, the department must approve the city ordinance that extends the school or playground speed limit (RCW 47.24.020(11) and RCW 46.61.415(5)). 4.

Speed Limits on State Highways Within Tribal Reservation Boundaries –
Beginning in 2009, state law (RCW 46.61.480) affirms that tribal authorities may determine the speed limit on the portions of non-limited access state highways that pass within tribal reservation boundaries. The speed limit must be based on an engineering and traffic investigation and is not effective until approved by
WSDOT, and appropriate signing is posted.
Submit a Calendar Agenda Action request to the State Traffic Engineer for approval. 5.
Page 6-16
Speed Limits on Ocean Beaches – Ocean beaches are under the jurisdiction of the Washington State Parks and Recreation Commission (RCW 79A.05.610).
The Commission has set the maximum speed limit on beaches at 25 mph (WAC 352-37-130).
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6

6.
Minimum Speed Limit – Although RCW 46.61.425(2) authorizes the department to post a minimum speed limit on a highway segment, the Rules of the Road do not mandate a statutory minimum speed limit for state highways. RCW 46.61.415 states in part that minimum speed limits on local roadways may not be set lower than 20 mph. Further, RCW 46.61.440 sets 20 mph as the speed limit at marked school or playground crosswalks. For consistency with these statutes, it is suggested that 20 mph be the lowest speed limit that the department will consider. 7.
20 MPH Speed Limits within a City or Town – When approached by a town or city, and the land use context indicates significant interaction of people walking, biking, and using motorized vehicles, a regulatory 20 MPH speed limit should be considered using the following guidance: • The State Highway functional classification shall be a nonarterial highway.
These highways typically provide both land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas and differ from the arterial system. • The proposed speed zone is within incorporated city/town limits and is supported by the city/town. An ordinance is required for all non-limited access highways. • The existing posted speed limit is 25 MPH. • The roadway should have common characteristics to effectively constrain speed. • The Washington State Patrol and local agency law enforcement are in support of the reduction. • Reference the Guidance for Setting Speed Limit 20 MPHs (2019), outside of school zones.
Once a determination has been made, submit your Calendar Agenda Action item to the State Traffic Engineer for approval. In your cover memorandum, include information regarding the above criteria used in your determination.
In addition to towns and cities, a lower speed limit may be considered in unique situations such as weigh stations, ferry terminals or rest areas. 8.
Vehicle Specific Speed Limits, Trucks – The maximum speed limit for trucks is
60 mph (RCW 46.61.410). The department may set lower maximum limits by vehicle class if determined necessary for safety reasons (RCW 46.61.405(2)).
Trucks are defined as vehicles over 10,000 pounds gross weight and all vehicles in combination (except auto stages). RCW 46.04.130 defines a combination of vehicles as every combination of motor vehicle and motor vehicle, motor vehicle and trailer, or motor vehicle and semi-trailer.
WSDOT Traffic Manual

M 51-02.10
Page 6-17 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations 9.
Environmental Review Process – SEPA requires an environmental review of any proposal to raise the speed limit on a highway to above 55 mph. Contact the
Regional Environmental Manager’s Office for information on the environmental review process and to determine if the proposed speed limit change area falls within an air quality maintenance area (non-attainment area) for carbon monoxide or ozone. A completed review must accompany the traffic regulation request package. For further information, consult the Environmental Manual M 31-11.
Either of two review procedures will be required: a)
If none of the proposed change area is located within an air quality maintenance area, the reviewer completes the Non- project Environmental
Checklist and the Determination of Non-Significance. Include a copy in the traffic regulation package and provide copies to the Headquarters
Environmental Services Office. It is not necessary to provide a copy to any other jurisdiction, nor does SEPA require a comment period. b)
If any part of the proposed change area is located within an air quality maintenance area, the local Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) must model impacts from the proposed speed limit increase. If the modeling shows that the carbon monoxide and ozone allowances are not exceeded, follow the same procedures outlined for areas outside air quality maintenance areas. If the modeling shows that the carbon monoxide and ozone allowances will be exceeded, the impacts must be mitigated before the speed limit may be increased.

Washington State Laws in Setting Speed Limits:
Maximum speed limits for state highways, county roads, and city streets are mandated in the Rules of the Road (RCW 46.61.400). Statutory speed limits are: a)
Twenty-five miles per hour on city and town streets; b)
Fifty miles per hour on county roads; c)
Sixty miles per hour on state highways
The department may raise or lower state highway speed limits based on an engineering and traffic investigation (RCW 46.61.405 and 46.61.410).
WAC 468-95-045 modifies the MUTCD section 2B.13 to give guidance that the 85th percentile speed is a consideration along with other factors in setting speed limits.
These factors include: • Road characteristics, shoulder condition, grade, alignment, and sight distance. • The pace speeds. • Roadside development and environment. • Parking practices and pedestrian activity. • Reported crash experience for at least a 12-month period (WSDOT looks at three years); and • Other factors, such as route development or comprehensive plans
Page 6-18
WSDOT Traffic Manual

M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6
RCW 47.24.020 establishes jurisdictional control with respect to state highways that are also considered city streets. Cities have the authority to regulate speed limits, however, speed limits not identical to state law must be approved the Secretary of Transportation.
RCW 46.61.415 Local authorities may establish or alter speed limits in their respective jurisdictions based on an engineering and traffic investigation. Speed limit increases are limited to sixty miles per hour and decreases are limited to twenty miles per hour.
Cities and towns within their jurisdiction may establish a maximum speed limit of twenty miles per hour on a nonarterial highway, or part of a nonarterial highway, that is within a residence district or business district.
A city or town may establish a twenty mile per hour speed limit without an engineering and traffic investigation if the city or town has developed procedures regarding establishing a maximum speed limit under RCW 46.61.415(3). Any speed limit established under this subsection may be canceled within one year of its establishment, and the previous speed limit reestablished, and may be done without an engineering and traffic investigation. Twenty mile per hour posted speed limits on state highways will likely be posted on collector routes in small rural towns.
Changes to the speed limit on state highways within an incorporated city or town must be approved the Washington State Department of Transportation.
B.
Other Regulations 1.
Bicycle Restrictions – Bicycle restrictions may be implemented at specific locations due to speed differentials between bicyclists and other traffic, extremely high traffic volumes, roadway geometrics, or other safety considerations. Where bicycle restrictions are necessary, alternate routing suitable for bicycles must be available.

2.
Restrictions on Limited Access Highways to Bicycles, RCW 46.61.160 –
The department of transportation may by order, and local authorities may by ordinance or resolution, with respect to any limited access highway under their respective jurisdictions prohibit the use of bicycles.
When considering an area for bicycle restriction or prohibition, conduct an engineering and traffic investigation and involve the regional active transportation bicycle coordinator, the bicycling community, and local agencies. Their input assures that bicycling interests are considered and that bicycle commute corridors remain intact.
Prior to submitting your calendar action, conduct a preliminary review of your submittal with the Active Transportation Divisions State Bicycle and Pedestrian
Coordinator. Document the investigation and submit the proposed regulation to the State Traffic Engineer as a calendar agenda item. Include: • A vicinity map and strip map showing SR/MP of the area. • Location and descriptions of available alternate routes. • Copies of documents, correspondence, citizen requests, and Active
Transportation Division review comments.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 6-19

Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations • Narrative on how bicycle interests are addressed. • Crash data involving bicycles. • Copies of WSP and/or local police agency concurrences. • Description of operational complexities (e.g., restricted shoulder width, interchange configurations) which identify the need for the regulation, as they relate to the following guidelines: 1.
Routes over 100,000 motor vehicles per day (ADT), or 2.
One or more of these criteria: 20,000 to 100,000 ADT
Criteria
Condition and/or Consideration
Shoulder Width
Less than 4 feet when ADT between 20,000 and 60,000 or 8 feet when ADT exceeds 60,000 ADT.
Double On/Off Ramps
Consider forced exit and return.

Interchange Spacing
Less than 2 miles with ramp volume greater than 10,000 ADT, use forced exit and return.
Tunnels/Bridges
Consider restriction when alternate routes are available.
The State Traffic Engineer will coordinate with the department’s State Bicycle and Pedestrian Coordinator to arrange for a review of the proposed restriction.
Once approved, Headquarters Traffic will notify the Active Transportation Division and they will update the statewide map on highways closed to bicycles (State
Highways Closed to Bicycles). 3.
Truck Restrictions – Truck restrictions may be imposed by statutory mandate (RCW or WAC), or by approval by the State Traffic Engineer through a Calendar
Agenda item. Truck restrictions are either as lane restrictions or route restrictions and designations.
Left‑Lane Restrictions – As mandated by RCW 46.61.100(3) and WAC 468510-020, no vehicle towing a trailer or no vehicle or vehicle combination over 10,000 lbs. may use the left lane of limited access highways having three or more general purpose lanes in one direction.
Lane restrictions for trucks may also be imposed on other highway sections through a State Traffic Engineer Calendar Action. Although rare, these restrictions may be necessary to improve traffic flow on facilities having two general purpose lanes in one direction.
Truck route restrictions and designations – These restrictions are normally implemented together to establish a preferred truck route through a corridor.
Route restrictions and designations may be initiated by a local agency for city streets that are also state highways.

Page 6-20
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6
An engineering and traffic investigation is conducted to determine the need for the restriction and route designation.
Document the investigation and submit the proposed regulation to the State
Traffic Engineer as a calendar agenda item. Include: • A vicinity map and strip map showing SR/MP of the area defining restricted route and truck route. • Description of operational characteristics which identify the need for the restriction. • Copies of speed studies, volume studies including vehicle classification, and a three-year crash history. • Copies of documents or correspondence from citizen groups. • A copy of the local agency ordinance if the restriction is for a city street that is also a state highway. • Copies of WSP and/or Washington Trucking Association concurrences.
Refer questions concerning WAC 468-510-020 to the State Traffic Regulations
Specialist. 4.
Hazardous Material Route Restriction – Some highways, due to operational characteristics, may be restricted for certain classes of vehicles, such as those carrying hazardous materials.
Conduct an engineering and traffic investigation and document the condition warranting a restriction. Submit as a calendar agenda item to the State Traffic
Engineer with the following supporting information: • A vicinity map showing the SR/MP of the restriction. • Summary document detailing operational characteristics (tunnels, high traffic volumes) of the highway warranting the restriction. • Copies of WSP and/or local agency concurrences.

5.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
HOV Lane Designation – High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) RCW 46.61.165 lanes are exclusive traffic lanes limited to carrying public transportation vehicles, private motor vehicles with the number of occupants specified on posted signs, motorcycles, and emergency vehicles RCW 47.52.025 (WAC 468-510-010). The
Revised Codes of Washington give WSDOT the right to designate any lane or ramp for HOV if it will increase the efficient utilization of the highway or will aid in the conservation of energy resources. The goal of the system is to maximize the people-carrying capacity of the freeway system, by providing incentives to use buses, vanpools, and carpools. In addition to provide capacity for future travel growth and reduce transportation-related pollution and dependency on fossil fuels.
M 51-02.10
Page 6-21 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations
Designated HOV lanes are established through a regulation approved by the State
Traffic Engineer. Conduct an engineering and traffic investigation, document the condition, and submit the following information as a Calendar Agenda item: • A vicinity map and strip identifying the SR and milepost limits and showing the locations of ramps within the proposed section. • The proposed minimum number of occupants per vehicle, and engineering documentation to support that minimum. • Projected lane occupancy rates for both the HOV lane and the adjacent general-purpose lanes. • Proposed hours of HOV operation. • Copies of design data. • For proposed shoulder HOV lanes, include the pavement depth information that the shoulder has adequate structural strength to support the HOV lane traffic. • On highways where bicycles are allowed on the shoulder, a narrative on how bicycle traffic will be accommodated if the shoulder HOV lane is approved. 6.
Angle Parking on State Highways
Statutory Requirements – Angle parking may be requested by a city or a town, for a city street that is also a state highway (RCW 46.61.575(3)). Local authorities, by ordinance or resolution, may permit angle parking on such a street, if the department has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
Conduct an engineering and traffic investigation of the location. If angle parking is determined appropriate, submit a Calendar Agenda item to the State Traffic
Engineer with the following supporting documentation: • Vicinity and strip map showing the SR/MP of the proposed parking regulation. • Narrative describing the need for angle parking, including speed limit and traffic volumes. • Crash data for the past three years. • Copy of the city or town ordinance establishing angle parking. • Parking plan layouts. • A demonstration (using a passenger vehicle for design purposes) that the parking maneuver can be accomplished without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Use turning movements to demonstrate ability. • Review and document bicycle lanes in the vicinity.
Where it is necessary to initiate removing angle parking, it is important to partner with local agencies (for city streets that are also state highways) and/or the business community to establish a mutually acceptable time frame. In many locations, angle parking may be the only parking available to business patrons. In these cases, a comprehensive approach to providing other parking must be part of any effort to remove angle parking. Refer to the procedures for Rescinding Traffic
Regulations below.

Page 6-22
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 6 7.
Park and Ride Lots and Rest Area Parking Restrictions
Park and Ride Lots: Within the department’s park and ride facilities, parking is limited to a maximum of 48 hours, when posted with signs (R8-1201). The State
Traffic Engineer established this restriction through an official Calendar Agenda action on January 8, 1982. (RCW 46.61.577) Local agency police can enforce parking regulations in WSDOT Park and Ride lots if the city or town has adopted an ordinance similar to the department’s 48 hour parking maximum.
Work closely with regional transit agencies, Public Transportation and Regional
Planning offices when considering changes to Park and Ride facilities. Included is a link to WSDOT’s Park and Ride locations statewide; Park and Ride.
If modifications are necessary to the 48-hour ruling, submit a Calendar Agenda item to the State Traffic Engineer with the following supporting documentation: • Vicinity map showing SR/MP of Park and Ride Location. • Narrative describing the need for the parking restriction. • Local Agency ordinance if located outside the boundary of a limited access highway. • Documentation related to communication with Regional Planning Division,
Public Transportation, local transit agency, law enforcement, regional maintenance, and local agency.

8.
Rest Area Parking: Rest Area parking is permitted by law RCW 47.38.020.
Rest Area parking is limited to eight hours within a twenty-four-hour period.
No person shall camp maintain a camp, tent, or other sleeping accommodation in a Rest Area within the limits of the right-of-way of interstate highways or other state highways or in other areas of state or interstate highways as designated in RCW 47.12.250.
The department may designate zones within a Rest Area with shorter parking time limits for the purposes of maximum efficiency and safety.
Commercial Vehicles can park up to an hour beyond the federally mandated rest period. In most cases this is eleven hours.
The department shall post the appropriate signage consistent with RCW 46.55.070(1) at all Rest Areas regarding the parking time limits in this section.
If modifications are necessary outside of what is authorized, submit as a
Calendar Agenda item to the State Traffic Engineer with the following supporting information: • Vicinity and strip map showing the SR/MP of the proposed parking regulation. • Narrative describing the need for parking restriction. • WSP concurrence. • Parking plan layouts.
WSDOT Traffic Manual

M 51-02.10
Page 6-23 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations 9.
Other Parking restrictions; Ferry Terminals, and Chain-Up Areas, conduct an engineering and traffic investigation of the location and document the condition.
Submit the proposed restriction as a Calendar Agenda item to the Regional
Administrator together with copies of all correspondence associated with the request. 10. Regulation of Sales within State Parking Facilities – The use of state parking facilities for sales of vehicles or other merchandise is not allowed and the supporting enforcement statutes are as follows: • RCW 46.55.070 specifies the posting requirements for public parking facilities. • RCW 46.55.010(14) defines an unauthorized vehicle and the required period of time prior to impoundment for posted public parking facilities. • RCW 46.55.080 authorizes that police officers may direct the impoundment of unauthorized vehicles. • RCW 47.32.120 makes it unlawful to “merchandise” in a manner that requires the use of any portion of state highway right of way. • RCW 46.55.240(1)(a) provides a city, town, or county the authority to adopt the provisions of RCW 46.55 by ordinance or resolution. • WAC 308-330-436 of the Model Traffic Ordinance (MTO) may be used by local agencies who have adopted the MTO, for park and ride lots located within their jurisdiction. 11. Permanent Weight Restrictions – Permanent weight restrictions may be imposed if the structure is deemed insufficient to support the maximum legal load. An example, a bridge restriction could be due to the deterioration of the structure over time or they were built to an old standard or code. Bridge and Structures division will normally initiate bridge weight restrictions.
Investigate and document the need for the restriction and submit a Calendar
Agenda Action request to the State Traffic Engineer. Include: • A strip map to include SR and MP. • A narrative describing the road or bridge condition leading to the restriction. • The appropriate maximum weight limit for a restricted section of roadway, as determined by the department’s Materials Laboratory. • A determination of the appropriate bridge weight limit as set by the Bridge and
Structures office. • Citizen or local agency correspondence. • Alternate routing, if available. • Detour plan, if necessary. • A copy of WSP concurrence.
Weight restrictions are signed with the appropriate R12 series signs illustrated in the Sign Fabrication Manual M 55-05.

Page 6-24
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations 6-5
Chapter 6
Other Traffic Restrictions
Compression Brake Prohibition – The department does not regulate compression brake use; compression brake regulations are enacted by local agencies and may be signed on state highways as described in the Chapter 2. 6-6
Rescinding Existing Traffic Regulations
Occasionally changes to the highway or roadside environment create the need to rescind a traffic regulation. The Regional Administrator or State Traffic Engineer accomplishes this through a Calendar Action Agenda item. Removing the signs or posted notices of the regulation does not rescind the regulation.
A.
Regional Traffic Regulations – Use the following guidance when rescinding regional traffic regulations: 1.

When removing a traffic signal, complete Section E, Report of Change, on the regional copy of the Traffic Signal Permit. Part of Section E provides documentation for the date of removal, together with the engineer’s name, title, and reporting date. A copy of that permit is then sent to the Headquarters Traffic
Regulations Specialist for retention in the signal permit file. 2.
Reduced regulatory speeds in construction or maintenance areas may be implemented under certain conditions specified within Secretary’s Executive
Order E 1060 and Traffic Manual Appendix 5.B. The guidance states that when the warranting conditions no longer exist, the reduced regulatory speed limit is no longer justified. Generally, this is at the end of the project and is noted in the
Work Zone Speed Reduction Request. The permanent speed limit signs are then reinstalled, uncovered, or turned toward traffic.
The Regional Administrator, using the regional Calendar Agenda process, has the authority to rescind the following regulations if they are no longer necessary: • Stop Control on state highways. • Turn prohibitions. • Pedestrian prohibitions on partial or modified access controlled highways. • Roadside parking restrictions (except for angle parking, and restrictions for park and ride lots and other parking facilities). • Tow-away zones. • Prohibitions of fishing or jumping from bridges. • Weight or closure restrictions.
Conduct an engineering and traffic investigation and document the condition requiring the rescinding of the regulation. Removing the regulatory signs does not rescind the traffic regulation, but renders it unenforceable under
RCW 46.61.050(2).
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10

Page 6-25 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations
B.
Headquarters Traffic Regulations – The State Traffic Engineer, using the Calendar
Agenda Action process, rescinds the following regulations if they are no longer needed: • Bicycle prohibitions. • Truck restrictions. • HOV lane designations. • Angle parking on state highways. • Parking or sales restrictions for park and ride lots and other parking facilities.
Permanent regulatory speed limits may only be amended with a proposed speed zone revision submitted through a Calendar Agenda Action item.
Provide documentation to support rescinding the traffic regulation to the State Traffic
Engineer’s office. As with the regional traffic regulations noted above, removing signs does not rescind the traffic regulation, but renders it unenforceable under
RCW 46.61.050(2). 6-7
Page 6-26

Figures
Figure 6-1
Regional Agenda Calendar Action
Figure 6-2
State Traffic Engineer Calendar Agenda
Figure 6-3
Signal Application Checklist
Figure 6-4
Speed Limit Check List
WSDOT Traffic Manual

M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Figure 6-1
Chapter 6
Regional Agenda Calendar Action
M 51-02.10
Page 6-27 Chapter 6
Figure 6-2
Page 6-28
Traffic Regulations
State Traffic Engineer Calendar Agenda

WSDOT Traffic Manual Traffic Regulations
Figure 6-3
Chapter 6
Signal Application Checklist (page 1 or 2)
Date:
Submitted By:
Pennit No.:
Location: SR No.
MP
Minor Rd.

Vicinity Map: lndude a general vicinity map of area showing intersecting roads, and any other features such as nearby signals and interconnected systems that may be of importance for analysis of application.
ADTS: Include an AOTS for all approaches entering the intersection.
ADT: Mainline
N
S
E
W
Mainline
ADT: Minor St.
Minor St.

No. of lanes: Mainline Thru
Minor St. Thru
Number of Tum lanes: Mainline
Priority Array
Signed Speed limits: SSL on Mainline 85th %
SSL on Side Street
Estimated Start Date:
Estimated Cost:
Estimated Completion Date:
WSDOT Traffic Manual

M 51-02.10
Page 6-29 Chapter 6
Figure 6-3
Traffic Regulations
Signal Application Checklist (page 2 or 2)
Maintenance Responsibility: Co.
City
State
Funding Responsibility: Co.
Volume Counts: Be sure to remove all free right turn movements in your volume counts to ensure that an accurate analysis of the intersection can be done.
Warrants Met: Warrant No. 1
Warrant No. 7

Hrs.
Warrant No. 2
Crash Exper.
Other
Brief Summary: Include previously tried corrective measures, proximity to schools, shopping centers, etc.
Also include citizen input and whether or not this is part of a program project.
Page 6-30
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Regulations
Figure 6-4

Chapter 6
Speed Limit Check List
Location: SR:
BEGIN MP:
END MP:
Vicinity Map: Include a general vicinity map of area showing city limit boundaries and adjacent speed zones, and any other features of importance for analysis of the speed zone request.
Strip Map: Include a strip map showing 10 MPH Pace and 85th percentile speeds within the proposed area to be considered, noting the appropriate mileposts. If there are other contributing factors, such as, curve warning signs with advisory speeds, and pedestrian crossings, include them.
Speed Limits (Include a current copy of the Speed Zone inventory.):
Existing
Proposed

MPH, MP to MP
MPH, MP to MP
MPH, MP to MP
MPH, MP to MP
MPH, MP to MP
MPH, MP to MP
Lane Width:
Shoulder Width:
Collision Data: Include the latest three (3) years collision data together with yearly collision rate, yearly critical rate, and yearly statewide average for the area to be considered.
Correspondence: Include all appropriate correspondence, including citizen petitions and local ordinance.
Concurrences:
Washington State Patrol:

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
City:
County:
Page 6-31 Chapter 6
Traffic Regulations
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 6-32 Chapter 7 7-1
Specialized Highway Uses
Introduction
State highways function as multi-modal travel routes for multiple transportation purposes and serve commuters, commercial vehicles, bicyclists, pedestrians, transit, recreational and other traffic. In addition, there may be both short-term and long-term specialized uses of the roadways. Short-term special uses of the highways include parades, running or bicycle events, filming, and festivals. Long-term special uses such as designated shoulder- driving segments for slower vehicles, or school bus stops or pedestrian crossings on limited access highways, can also be authorized on specific roadway sections. Requests are also received for permanent specialized highway uses such as transit vehicle stops and placement of interpretive signing. This chapter provides guidelines to assist in responding to special highway use requests.
A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU #C010355GSC) between the Washington State
Department of Transportation (WSDOT) and Washington State Patrol (WSP) governs the operation of special events (parades, running or bicycle events, filming, and festivals) on state highways. The MOU establishes guidelines and defines responsibilities for event operations. It also includes examples of event administration documents (Figure 7-4).
Special events on the state highway system are administered through the regional Traffic
Office for events taking place in a single region, or through the State Traffic Engineer’s office for multi-region events. A Letter of Agreement or a Letter of Acknowledgement between
WSDOT and the special event permittee defines the operation. There is no fee to event permittees for special event administration and coordination.
Continuing or long-term specialized uses are also addressed in the Traffic office, and may include coordination with other WSDOT offices or agencies. The State Traffic Engineer’s office is available as a resource for questions about events or other specialized highway uses not specifically addressed in this chapter.

7-2
Bicycling, Running, Walking, Parade, Festival, and Bicycle Racing
Special Events
WSDOT receives numerous requests for short-term use of state highways or right of way for recreational or other public events. The Regional or State Traffic Engineer’s office will respond to event permittees within ten working days of receiving a request to begin the review and coordination process. Special events are generally not held on fully controlled limited access highways. Occasional exceptions may be considered where no alternate route is available and roadway conditions allow for participant and other roadway users’ safety.
In reviewing an event request, WSDOT will: • Establish on-going communication with event permittees to address route determination, traffic control, logistical issues, and other concerns. • Conduct a traffic engineering analysis to determine the impact of the proposed event, as needed.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-1 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses • Consult with regional Construction and Maintenance offices to identify any operational conflicts along the proposed route. • Contact WSP to coordinate the event per the WSDOT/WSP Memorandum of
Understanding, “Special Events on State Highways”. • Review special event traffic control plans. • Discuss alternative routes, if needed. • Submit separate billings to Event Permittee for services related but not limited to labor costs, equipment related costs, and indirect costs for services such as; traffic control, maintenance operations, work zone safety or other highway operations activities.
Additionally, WSDOT may: • Provide use of Changeable Message Signing and Highway Advisory Radio (HAR) systems where available and appropriate. • Suggest event specific signing to provide information for all highway users.
A.

Administration Guidelines – Use of state highways or highway right of way for bicycle, running, walking, parades, festivals, or other special events is administered through either a Letter of Agreement or Letter of Acknowledgement between WSDOT and the event permittee. Events that will not impact highway operations, where all participants will follow all Rules of the Road (Chapter 46.61 RCW) at all times, and where no traffic control is needed are not required to contact WSDOT. However, because those events may also benefit from WSDOT services, contact with the event permittee is encouraged to ensure coordination with WSDOT projects, WSP, and other special events occurring in the immediate vicinity.
Planning a Special Event on state highways, event permittee may use WSDOT website for an online or pdf application. Our application process is located online at www.wsdot.wa.gov/contact/events/special-events. Based on the specific event situation as described below; issue a Letter of Agreement or a Letter of
Acknowledgement, or if circumstances warrant, a Letter of Denial. These documents are signed by the regional or headquarters signing authority. The Letter of Agreement is signed by the event permittee and regional or headquarters signing authority. If an event is denied, WSDOT will work with the event permittee to seek solutions to the issues causing the denial. Event permittee may appeal a denial through the process outline in this chapter. 1.
Letter of Acknowledgement – A letter of Acknowledgement is issued when event participants will follow the Rules of the Road at all times and when no specific traffic control is needed and the event will not negatively impact traffic. The
Letter of Acknowledgement may (Figure 7-5) address specific event conditions such as: • Operational restrictions on specific highway sections due to conflicts with construction or maintenance operations. • The use of small crashworthy signs for guiding event participants. • Other highway conditions or restrictions.
Page 7-2
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses
Chapter 7
Examples of when a Letter of Acknowledgement is appropriate:

2. a.
A group of 100 people will participate in a running event using portions of a state highway. The runners will conform to the Rules of the Road at all times.
No impacts to traffic. b.
A bicycle ride of 500 people uses a filtered start over several hours so bicycle riders are spread out along the roadways. Riders will cross the highway intersections in a legal manner and follow all other Rules of the Road. c.
A vehicle convoy of 10 to 15 vehicles accompanying “Santa Claus” to a local charity event uses portions of the state highway, following the Rules of the
Road at all times.
Letter of Agreement – A Letter of Agreement (Figure 7-6) is issued when
WSDOT’s review and analysis determines that the event participants are not able to follow the Rules of the Road, that there will be an impact on traffic operations, or that special traffic control is required. Additional information and terms may be attached as Exhibits to the Agreement.
A Letter of Agreement is developed when the event will: • Require special traffic control (flaggers, escort vehicles, and/or law enforcement) to support the safe passage of event participants and the traveling public. • Occur outside the roadway but within the right of way, and involve the use of highway facilities for non-transportation purpose. • Close a portion of the highway to the public. • Use services or personnel provided by WSDOT, WSP, or other law enforcement. • Placement directional signing for the traveling public on WSDOT right of way.
Examples of when a Letter of Agreement is appropriate:

WSDOT Traffic Manual a.
A running or bicycle event uses local police control at a state highway intersection to allow participants to cross the highway while on-coming traffic stops. b.
A large running event requests the use of portions of an approved limited access highway. c.
A parade closes the highway to traffic and a detour is required. d.
Temporary directional signs to a community festival are placed on the state highway right of way.
M 51-02.10
Page 7-3 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses
The following guidelines are considered and addressed when developing a Letter of Agreement: a.
Event permittees should be encouraged to use county roads or city streets where possible.

b.
Where a state highway will be closed for an event, a suitable detour route must be available and the Region Traffic Engineer or their designee must review a detour traffic control plan. Road closures require a minimum threeday advance notice to the public (RCW 47.48.020). Longer notice is desirable for large impact events. c.
Events requiring a Letter of Agreement must have a commercial general liability insurance policy that names WSDOT as an “additional insured”.
Referenced in Exhibit A – Figure 7-7. Minimum policy requirements for an event are for $1 million per occurrence and with a $2 million in the aggregate. If vehicles are used as part of the event operation, a minimum $1 million per occurrence commercial automobile liability insurance coverage must be added to the policy. Proof of insurance and indemnification of
WSDOT is required prior to issuing the Letter of Agreement. d.
The event permittee or sponsors will pay for all extraordinary costs for labor and materials provided by WSDOT, WSP, or local agency law enforcement. e.
WSDOT may determine that pre-event notices of the event are needed in specific locations or situations. This is a courtesy to local communities and can reduce traffic congestion on event day. If used, the event permittee will post the notices seven to ten days before the event. f.
Requests for state highway use within an incorporated city or town should have the city or town’s concurrence. g.
At least 72 hours (preferably seven days) in advance of the event, the event permittee shall notify all local fire, ambulance, transit, law enforcement departments, and other service-oriented activities that may be impacted by the event. • There may be occasions when a pre-event meeting with all of the above is necessary. This will ensure open communication is available and the event organizer is in direct communication with law enforcement and emergency personnel. h. 3.
Page 7-4

Department regulations and state law limit bicycling events and prohibit running or walking events on fully controlled limited access highways.
Post Event Review – WSDOT staff may conduct a follow-up evaluation to assess event operation. Discussion with the event permittee, law enforcement, WSDOT
Area Maintenance and other affected groups can help identify any operational or public safety concerns and identify needed improvements. Document these issues so they can be addressed the next time the event occurs.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses
B.
Chapter 7
Appeal Process – WSDOT has an appeal process for cases when a request for a special event on a state highway is denied. The letter of appeal should be submitted to the
State Traffic Engineer within 30 days of the event denial, and a minimum of 14 days before the scheduled event.
WSDOT and Event Permittee Coordination – When WSDOT receives a request from an event organizer for an event taking place in a single region, either from the online application or an email with an attached pdf, the regional Traffic office administers the special event. The State Traffic Engineer’s office will administer special events taking place across multiple regions.
WSDOT’s review identifies the proposed event’s impact on traffic operations and focuses on traffic control or operational solutions to mitigate those impacts.
Communication between WSDOT, event permittee, and WSP is essential to develop effective event operations and to schedule agreed upon services.
WSDOT staff determines if construction, maintenance or other operations will conflict with the event; or if there are atypical roadway conditions such as a construction detour or another scheduled special event. Conflicts can often be avoided through schedule or route adjustments. Include information about significant activities and conditions that may affect the event in the Letter of Acknowledgement or Letter of
Agreement. Contact the ferry system when an event includes use of state ferries.
WSDOT may provide advance public notice about events that may impact traffic operations as a courtesy to the affected communities. Advance notice can influence regular highway users to choose other routes on event day, thus reducing event impacts. Including any requirements for giving such notice in the Letter of Agreement.
Notice can include: • Placement of pre-event signs along the affected route. • Press release by the organizer and WSDOT. • Other public information efforts commensurate with the event scale.
Work with the region or headquarters public information office (PIO) to publicize large events and their associated congestion or delays.
Copies of completed Acknowledgement and Agreement letters are shared with the following: • Regions and state Traffic Engineer’s offices • WSP • Affected construction or maintenance offices are also notified.
Sharing this information helps assure statewide uniformity in WSDOT special event administration.

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-5 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses
C.
Bicycle Racing – Timed event bicycle races are sometimes held on state highways under purview of WAC 468-400 (Bicycle Racing) and Washington Bicycle Racing
Guidelines (www.wsdot.wa.gov/publications/manuals/fulltext/M3050/BRG.pdf).
Refer to these guidelines for Bicycle Race event operation and administration. The
WAC and racing guidelines were developed through a cooperative effort between
WSDOT, the bicycle racing community, WSP, and the Washington Traffic Safety
Commission. A letter of Agreement is developed between WSDOT and the event permittee and liability insurance indemnifying the department is required.
There are several common types of bicycle races: Time Trial, Criterium, Road Race,
Stage Races, Cyclocross, Mountain Bike (MTB), Duathlon, Triathlon, or Multi-sport
Event, and Relay/Cross Country. Each type of bicycle race has the potential to utilize a state highway, and each type has specific traffic control needs. Details are covered in the Bicycle Racing Guidelines.

7-3
Filming on State Highways
Filming of commercials or movies on state highways is administered using the Letter of
Agreement in conjunction with Exhibit A for Insurance, Figure 7-7 and Exhibit C for Filming
Event Agreement, Figure 7-9. The Letter of Agreement authorizes the filming and defines the terms and conditions applicable to the particular operation. It should be completed ten days prior to filming, if possible.
When WSDOT receives a request for filming, conduct a traffic engineering investigation that considers traffic impacts and safety. The regional Traffic office administers filming events taking place in a single region or through the State Traffic Engineer’s office for multi-region filming events.
Filming may not be scheduled on highways with high traffic volumes or during peak traffic flow periods. Generally, Interstate and other freeway mainline closures are not permitted.
Road or lane closures on other state highways may be considered.
Traffic control and enforcement shall be provided by the WSP in cooperation with local police agencies where appropriate. The filming company must pay all costs for labor, equipment, and supplies incurred by the department and the WSP within 30 days from event permittee’s receipt of billing.
The filming company must obtain a commercial general liability insurance policy that names WSDOT as an ‘additional insured’. Minimum policy requirements are $1 million per occurrence with $2 million in the aggregate coverage per filming event. Commercial automobile insurance coverage must be $1 million per occurrence if vehicles are supporting and/or to be used in the filming event. Proof of insurance and indemnification of WSDOT must be provided prior to the filming event.
WSDOT and the WSP may develop additional guidelines and operational procedures for individual filming operations on state highways. These are included in the Letter of
Agreement and Exhibit C – Filming Event Agreement.

Page 7-6
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses 7-4
Chapter 7
Other Special Events
WSDOT receives requests for many types of special events on state highways or right of way. Car or tractor caravans, wagon trains, transcontinental running events, and stagecoach tours have all been conducted on state highways. Each of these is administered through a
Letter of Agreement or Letter of Acknowledgement, as determined by a traffic engineering analysis and depending on the specific event conditions. Contact the State Traffic Engineer’s office for discussion of any questions or concerns about special events. 7-5
Traffic Control for Special Events
When a special event includes a highway closure, detour, flagging operation, or other traffic control, a traffic control plan is developed and submitted by the event permittee to WSDOT.
Consideration is given to the type of highway, traffic speed, traffic volumes, geometrics at the traffic control site, and duration and type of event operation.
When event permittees need help in plan development, WSDOT may either offer that assistance or advise the organizers of reference materials contained in both the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and WSDOT’s Work Zone Traffic Control Guideline
For Maintenance Operations M 54-44. WSDOT must review all event traffic control plans.
Consider traffic control or other special operations with these event circumstances or roadway conditions: • Where events with mass starts begin on state routes, or where, because of course design, large numbers of participants enter the state route together. • When the number of participants may cause delay of five or more vehicles, impacting traffic operations. • When narrow shoulders cause vehicles to move into the opposing traffic lane to pass event participants. • Where there are significant sight distance restrictions such as numerous no passing zones. • Other safety or operational considerations.
Traffic control must meet MUTCD and WSDOT standards. Traffic control operations shall be conducted by law enforcement officers or certified flaggers. They shall comply with the submitted traffic control plans reviewed by WSDOT. Typical traffic control plans are located in the MUTCD or WSDOT Work Zone Traffic Control Guidelines for Maintenance Operations
M 54-44. For example, TCP 20 may be used to address the intermittent stopping of highway traffic to allow event participants to safely enter or cross a highway or intersection.
The following guidelines are for developing a traffic control plan for intersection flagging operations:
A.

All flagging operations shall be conducted by a uniformed law enforcement officer or a flagger controlling each intersection leg.
B.
If flagging at a signalized intersection, the signal shall be shut down or placed in flash mode. Flagger directions at signalized intersections shall not be in conflict with signal displays. During hours of darkness, flagging stations shall be illuminated.
C.
For flagging operations on highways with a posted speed of 40 mph or less, three
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-7 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses advance signs on each approach are generally used. The “ROAD WORK AHEAD” sign should be replaced by an event specific message such as “RUNNING EVENT AHEAD”, “BIKES ON ROAD”, OR “BICYCLE CROSSING”. The second and third signs should be “PREPARE TO STOP” and the “FLAGGER” symbol respectively. 7-6
D.

On high-speed highways, where the posted speed is 45 mph or more, a four sign sequence is generally used. The additional sign may be either a repeated “EVENT
AHEAD” or a specific sign noting the traffic condition.
E.
Sign spacing shall conform to WSDOT requirements, based on highway type and speeds.
Special Event Signing Guidelines
Special event related signs may be allowed on the state right of way through the Letter of
Agreement or Letter of Acknowledgement. The purpose of special event signs is to help manage event related traffic or to alert roadway users of potential traffic impacts. Sign types include: • Directional signing to the event. • Route designation signing for participants. • Pre-event signing to give advance notice to roadway users. • Detour signing
Announcement of the event on a banner may be allowed in some circumstances (WAC 468-95-148) (see Section 7-8).
A.
Directional Signing for Large-Scale Events – Temporary directional signing may be installed for large-scale spectator activities such as county fairs, conventions, and major sporting events that do not qualify as destinations on permanent supplemental guide signs. This requires a written agreement between the WSDOT region and the event sponsor.
The department may design, fabricate, install, maintain, and remove temporary directional guide signs using the following criteria:

Page 7-8 1.
The region determines that the event will generate sufficient traffic to create operational challenges along a state highway. 2.
The sign is requested by the sponsoring agency with enough lead-time for design, fabrication, and installation (a minimum of three months). 3.
Signing is from the nearest state highway only. 4.
Signs are sized for the specific highway type. 5.
Signs shall be white letters on a green background and the design shall provide a clear, simple message.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses
B.
Chapter 7

6.
Installation and removal shall be by WSDOT or an approved contractor and meet
MUTCD and WSDOT requirements. 7.
Any needed follow-through signing on local roadways must be installed prior to sign installation on the state highway.
Day of Event Directional Signs – Directional signs may be installed on the day(s) of the event to direct traffic from the nearest state highway to the event or event parking.
Signing will be located only at points where traffic must turn from the state highway or make another route decision. Follow-through signing on city and county roads must also be installed. No commercial advertising is allowed. 1.
Signs are allowed through a Letter of Agreement. 2.
Signs must be of lightweight crashworthy materials such as corrugated plastic.
Lightweight ‘sandwich board’ signs no larger than 4-feet by 4-feet may be allowed. 3.
Sign type, size, and location will be determined and noted in the Letter of Agreement.

4.
Signs may be in place only for the duration of the special event. 5.
Signing shall not interfere with or obstruct the view of any traffic control devices or the sight distance to or from an intersection or road access. 6.
Portable Changeable Message Sign (PCMS) and other portable signs shall be placed off the shoulder if practicable, or on the far right of the shoulder, to maintain bicycle and pedestrian traffic. Examples of sign messages: • Fair Next Two Exits • Heavy Traffic Ahead • Expect Delays
C. 7.
The regions may determine additional guidelines for day of event directional signing to address traffic safety and operational concerns. 8.
Signs installed on the right of way, which are not described in the Letter of
Agreement, may be immediately removed by WSDOT.
Route Designation Signing for Event Participants – Small signs may be used to direct event participants along the event route or to event points such as rest or food stops. 1.
Signs are allowed through the Letter of Acknowledgement or Agreement, which addresses sign size and type.

2.
Signs must be of lightweight crashworthy materials such as corrugated plastic.
Lightweight ‘sandwich board’ signs no larger than 4-feet by 4-feet may be allowed. 3.
Signs may be in place only for the duration of the special event. 4.
Messages should consist of “Name of Event” or other simple message and a directional arrow. No commercial advertising is allowed. Sign and Pavement
Markings example link.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-9 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses

D.
Pre-event Signing – Advance notice signing is sometimes installed to advise regular highway users of an upcoming event that will affect normal traffic operations. It is a courtesy to any communities or highway users affected by a special event to alert them about potential traffic impacts and delays. • Pre-event signs, if required, are addressed in the Letter of Agreement. • Sign size, material, message, and locations are noted in the Letter of Agreement.
Sign color shall be black letters on an orange background. • Sign message is limited to name and date of event and a traffic control message such as “Use Alternate Route” or “Expect Delays” or more specific directional information as applicable. No commercial advertising is allowed. • Signs and supports must be of crashworthy materials. Types include roll-up signs on approved portable bases and signs mounted on approved posts. Allowance is made for crashworthy sign materials such as corrugated plastic. • Portable Changeable Message Signs (PCMS) sign messages such as “Special Event
Ahead”, “Expect Delays”, “Bicycles on Road” and “Flaggers Ahead”. • Post mounted signs shall be installed per MUTCD installation standards. Signs shall not be installed on existing regulatory or warning sign posts. Signs may be installed on existing guide or informational sign posts. • Pre-event signing shall be installed between seven and ten days before the event and removed within three days after the event.
Additionally, when a roadway is to be closed for an event, pre-event “Road to be Closed” signs must be posted a minimum of three days in advance (RCW 47.48.020). The sign will give the date(s) and time(s) of closure. 7-7
Special Event Pavement Markings
WSDOT allows placement of temporary directional pavement markings (commonly called “Dan henrys” in the bicycle community) to indicate the special event route. These markings give direction to event participants and are located at points where a route decision must be made.
Page 7-10
A.
All pavement markings must use non-permanent, chalk based or “fade-away” paint.
Permanent marking paint is prohibited.

B.
Markings should be placed only just before, at, and just after directional decisionmaking points.
C.
Route confirmation markings are permitted at major intersections.
D.
For bicycle events, markings are placed to the right of the edge line where riders have a good rideable shoulder. Otherwise, they are located in the ordinary line of riding.
E.
For running events, pavement markings are placed on the shoulder facing traffic.
F.
The markings should be visible to event participants but placed so they are unobtrusive to others. A guideline is to make these marks no larger than 12 × 18 inches.

G.
Markings must be placed away from traffic control pavement markings and existing construction or survey pavement markings.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses 7-8
Chapter 7
Banners
WSDOT receives requests from public agencies, civic organizations, the event sponsors, to install banners for a variety of informational purposes on state highway right of way.
Most installation requests are for horizontal suspension over the roadway, using span wire, and are the focus of this section. The occasional requests for vertically mounted banners, such as on luminaire poles, are processed case-by-case.
Some installations may require wind load analysis prior to approval (see Section 7-8.D).
A.

Statutory and Regulatory Overview – The term “banners” means the signs, banners, and decorations described in state law (RCW 47.36.030) and the Washington
Administrative Code (WAC 468-95-148). WAC 468-95-148 establishes approval criteria (see Section 7-8.C) that allow the department to permit banners visible to state highways. RCW 47.42.020(10) exempts banners from the Highway Advertising Control regulations, if the banners do not display commercial advertising.
On city streets that are also part of the state highway system under RCW 47.24, the cities are responsible for approving banner installations that are more than 20 feet above the roadway surface. WSDOT allows banners 20 feet above the roadway surface (WAC 468-95-148). • Thus, requests for banners on city streets that are also part of the state highway system are referred to the city for approval. • On state highways in unincorporated areas, the department has the authority to regulate banners. • WSDOT maintains authority on limited access roadways, in both incorporated and unincorporated areas. Banners may not be visible from limited access highways.
B.
Permit Administration in Unincorporated Areas – Banners permits are administered through the region Traffic Office, using a Banner Placement Permit (Figure 7-1) issued by the regional signing authority. This permit may be modified to accommodate request for vertically installed banners.
The region Maintenance Office having jurisdiction over the proposed banner location receives a copy of the completed permit, for their information when processing overheight vehicle permits.
The region Traffic Office also coordinates any required wind load review or analysis with the headquarters Bridge and Structures Office.
For a banner attached to utility company-owned poles, the sponsor must provide the region with a copy of the utility company’s permitting correspondence. This practice assures WSDOT that the utility company’s wind load and banner attachment considerations have been addressed.
Temporary poles may be installed in department right of way outside the clear zone, after the sponsor secures a department-issued General Permit. This practice assures WSDOT that the installation won’t interfere with department operations or underground utilities, and that traffic control considerations are addressed. A Banner
Placement Permit is also required.

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-11 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses
As a matter of practice, WSDOT does not allow horizontally suspended banners to be attached to WSDOT-owned traffic signal poles or luminaire poles. Adding banners to signal poles may interfere with or obstruct the view of traffic control devices, in conflict with RCW 47.36.030 and WAC 468-95-148. Regarding luminaire poles, it’s likely that significant debris on the roadway would result from a knock-down. Banners should not be attached to crossing structures because a disconnection could cause a banner to fall onto the roadway.
Some cities have installed permanent banner poles on city-owned property outside the clear zone.
C.
D.
Approval Criteria – WSDOT may approve banner installations in unincorporated areas that promote a community sponsored event in accordance with the following criteria: 1.
Banner messages are limited to name, date, and event sponsor. Commercial advertising is not allowed (RCW 47.42.020 and WAC 468-95-148).

2.
At least 20 feet of vertical clearance must be maintained from the roadway surface to the bottom of the banner (RCW 47.36.030 and WAC 468-95-148). 3.
Banners are not permitted to be visible from Interstate highways, or any other state highways having a posted speed limit of 50 mph or greater (WAC 468-95-148). 4.
Banners shall not interfere with or obstruct the view of any traffic control device, or impair the operation of transportation management systems or illumination (RCW 46.36.030 and WAC 468-95-148). 5.
For temporary events, banners may be installed not more than 30 days before the event and shall be removed not more than three days after the event (WAC 468-95-148). The duration of informational banners is determined case by case. 6.
WSDOT will not permit a sign, banner, or decoration to be mounted over any multi-lane (four or more lanes) highway. Vertical mounting on luminaire posts is permitted, provided such installations meet wind load requirements specified by
WSDOT (WAC 468-95-148). 7.
WSDOT does not allow banners to be illuminated in any manner. (RCW 47.36.180).
Wind Load Analysis for Banners Placed on Vertical Poles – Standard size banner installations do not require a wind load analysis. Standard banner sizes range from two to four feet vertically by 20 to 24 feet horizontally, with three feet by 20 feet about average. Banner manufacturing incorporates wind slits or wind ports to minimize wind stress.
For larger banners consult with the Headquarters Traffic office to determine if the proposed installation warrants a wind load analysis. The Bridge and Structures Office will need 120-150 days for the wind load review if an analysis is necessary and may charge the event sponsor.
As an alternative, the event sponsor may submit wind load calculations, performed and stamped by an engineer licensed in Washington State, to verify the compatibility of the installation.

Page 7-12
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses 7-9
Chapter 7
Transit Vehicle Stop Zones
Region Traffic offices receive and review requests from transit agencies for approval of transit stops on state highways. The “Transit Vehicle Stop Zone Guidelines” Guidelines are currently under review and will be available shortly. The guidelines provide a standardized process for managing requests for transit stops outside incorporated areas. WSDOT has a commitment to making transit stop locations more viable and user friendly as well as safe.
The guidelines consider the operational needs of the department and transit authorities incorporating transit vehicle stops into the project design process.
When Transit Agencies request a transit vehicle stop zone outside of any incorporated city or town, the public transit agency shall be responsible for conducting a field review to evaluate accessibility to the proposed location. When the requested location is within the roadway, the transit agency shall have a policy for in-lane stops that addresses safety and operational issues. (WAC 468-46-010).
Transit agencies will complete the Transit Stop Application, and submit it to the Region
Development Services office or Region Planning, once submitted, the application will be forwarded to the regional Traffic Office, where they will conduct a field review and verify sight distance. It is required by law, once WSDOT receives the application from the public transit authority, WSDOT shall assess the sight distance for the proposed stopped (WAC 468-46-040). The investigation may include shoulder width, accessibility, roadway crossing opportunities, lighting, and possible room for shelters, see Figure 7-11. The Americans with
Disabilities Act guarantees access to public facilities (i.e., transit) for all persons; therefore, the review process must consider the needs of all transit users at each stage of transit use, including both before and after using the transit service.
Once the review has been completed, the stop location is either approved or denied. The region Development Services or Planning Division will administer the permit, Transit Stop
Permit. If a location is denied, a letter stating the reasons is issued by the region.
The Rules of the Road provide general restrictions and privileges concerning transit vehicle stops:
A.

RCW 46.61.560 provides that, outside of incorporated cities or towns, no one can stop, park, or leave a vehicle upon the roadway. An exception is granted for public transit vehicles stopped to receive or discharge passengers at a marked transit stop approved by the department or the county on their respective facilities.
It further allows public transit vehicle drivers to momentarily stop to receive or discharge passengers at unmarked stop zones under the following circumstances: • Stop in a safe and practicable position. • Activate four-way flashing lights. • Stop only where there is an unobstructed view, for an adequate distance to not create a hazard for other drivers.
The statute anticipates transit stops on the roadway within incorporated cities or towns where stops are frequent and operating speeds are typically lower. (Note that
RCW 46.04.500 excludes the shoulder from the definition of the roadway).
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-13 Chapter 7 7-10
Specialized Highway Uses
B.
RCW 46.61.570 specifies several locations where it is illegal to stand or park a vehicle, except temporarily to load or unload property or passengers, and authorizes other limitations or restrictions by city ordinance, county resolution, or department order (traffic regulation).

C.
RCW 46.61.575 authorizes WSDOT to place traffic control devices that prohibit, limit, or restrict, stopping, standing, or parking. This authority is granted for locations where
WSDOT has determined by regulation that stopping, standing, or parking will endanger highway users or interfere with the free movement of traffic.
D.
WAC 468-46-010 upon receipt of a transit stop request from a public transit authority, requesting approval of a transit vehicle stop zone outside of any incorporated city or town, the WSDOT shall assess the sight distance at the proposed location.
E.
WAC 468.46.040 WSDOT shall install, at its own expense, transit vehicle stop ahead symbol signing (W14-1011), for each approved transit vehicle stop zone where the transit vehicle is not visible for a distance of 500 feet. Signing shall be consistent with the MUTCD.
School Bus Stops on Highways
School bus stops must be located where there is a minimum of 500 feet sight distance to the bus stop, to provide adequate visibility. If feasible, locate stops off the state highway.
The state regulations noted below further govern locations. School District bus stop requirements are found in WAC 392-145-011.
A.

Limited Access Highways – WAC 468-58-030 and RCW 47.52 regulate school bus stops along limited access highways and prescribe the department’s related duties: 1.
School bus stops are not allowed along fully controlled limited access highways.
Exceptions may be authorized at interchanges where WSDOT has provided a location and along the mainline where there is a separated facility. 2.
WSDOT must approve school bus stops located along partial and modified control limited access highways in rural areas. 3.
WSDOT approval is not required along modified control limited access highways in urban areas. 4.
All approved school bus stops shall be signed in accordance with the MUTCD. 5.
The State Traffic Engineer will maintain an inventory of approved stops.
See Section 7-13 for information about pedestrians crossing limited access highways.
B.
WAC 392-145, Additional Rules for School Bus Drivers – The Superintendent of
Public Instruction Office (OSPI) adopted WAC rules that regulate school bus stopping.
Consider these rules when reviewing school bus stops on limited access highways: 1.

Page 7-14
Buses are not allowed to stop on a curve or a hill where visibility is less than
500 feet. Any existing bus stop locations that have less than the minimum 500 foot visibility must be moved to a compliant site to provide safety to the bus riders and roadway users. If no other stop location is possible, it shall be signed with a “SCHOOL BUS STOP AHEAD” sign (S3-1).
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses 7-11
Chapter 7 2.
No school bus may pull over to the left-hand side of the road to load or unload children. 3.
School children are not allowed to cross any roadway having three or more marked traffic lanes, or any highway divided into separate roadways, as described in RCW 46.61.150.
C.
Coordination with School Districts and Approval Process – WSDOT works cooperatively with the Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction (OSPI) to implement a school bus stop approval and inventory process based on the WAC rules.
The region works with the individual school districts to assure that school bus stops on limited access facilities meet those requirements. Figure 7-2 provides a sample
Proposed School Bus Stop Worksheet that the regions and the school districts may use cooperatively to assess and approve potential bus stops on partial or modified access controlled routes. The worksheet also provides the basic information the State
Traffic Engineer’s office needs to maintain the required bus stop inventory. Figure 7-3 illustrates the school bus stop approval and inventory process.

D.
School Bus Stop Inventory – WAC 468-58-030 instructs WSDOT to maintain a list of school bus stops on limited access highways. The regions shall maintain the list of limited access school bus stop inventory. The information is provided to the State
Traffic Engineer. This inventory may be collected at the beginning of each school year, relocations of stops and when new stops are established.
Interpretive Signs/Markers
Agreement GM 869 (Figure 7-12) between WSDOT and the Washington State Parks and Recreation Commission provides the procedures and guidelines for developing and maintaining interpretive signs and markers placed along the state highway. These markers depict the state’s natural and manmade history and are often located at designated pullouts of rest areas. The agreement documents the department’s responsibilities in locating and providing access to these markers. Use this process when new roadways, viewpoints or rest areas are being constructed or where a construction project includes an interpretive marker location. Contact the regional Accounting Services Office for agreement information. 7-12 “Memorial” Highways and Bridges
Per RCW 47.01.420, the Transportation Commission may, by resolution, name a highway or bridge to commemorate a person or group that has contributed significantly to Washington’s nation’s well-being. (Facility Naming Policy). Typically, the Commission receives a Joint
Memorial from the Washington State Legislature.
The Regional Administrator may also nominate a person or group to be honored through the naming process. Supporting information is supplied to the Office of the Secretary who reviews the request and forwards it to the Transportation Commission. The support information may include one of the following: • Letters of support from state and federal legislators representing area of the facility; • Resolutions passed by local, publicly elected bodies in the area of the facility; • Supportive action by or letters from local organizations such as local chambers of commerce or service clubs.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10

Page 7-15 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses
Another type of memorial designation is the “Blue Star” Memorial Highway. It was first initiated after World War II to memorialize veterans, and now honors all members of the armed services. “Blue Star” Memorial Highways are a project of the National Garden Clubs and request often originate from a local club. The Regional Administrator must present requests for designation to the Transportation Commission. Markers are not installed until the designation is received.
Marker plaques are 41 × 45 inches. The sign mounting and base size, style, and location are determined on an individual basis and approved by the region.
Plaques or signs memorializing highways or bridges are typically installed in rest areas, scenic overlooks, recreational areas, or other appropriate locations with a parking area, and where the installations are not visible to mainline traffic. Where there is no appropriate site off the main roadway, the MUTCD provides that one memorial sign per direction may be installed along the mainline, provided it does not affect safety or efficiency of traffic flow.
The Governor or the legislature approves request to dedicate a facility to a cause, rather than a person. 7-13
Pedestrian Crossing Limited Access Highways
WAC 468-58-030 contains provisions concerning the approval of pedestrian crossings of limited access highways. These provisions:
A.
Prohibit at-grade pedestrian crossings of fully controlled limited access highways.

B.
Permit crossing of multi-lane partially controlled or modified control limited access highways only where grade crossings are provided.
C.
Permit crossing of two lane, partially or modified control limited access highways at mailbox locations.
D.
Permit crossing of two lane, partially or modified control limited access highways at points designated for school children to cross as follows: • On two lane highways, at the school bus, when the bus is stopped in the traveled lane to load or unload students and its sign and signal lights are displayed as required by RCW 46.61.370. • On two lane highways, at least 100 feet from a school bus loading zone which is adjacent to the traveled lane and was established by school district, who determined that stopping in the traveled lane is hazardous.
Page 7-16
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses 7-14
Chapter 7

Shoulder Driving for Slow Vehicles
Regional Administrators may designate sections of a two lane state highway to be a “shoulder-driving area” to allow slow-moving vehicles to drive onto improved shoulders so faster vehicles can pass (RCW 46.61.428).
For specific highway characteristics of shoulder driving, refer to Design Manual 7-15
A.
When designing a shoulder for shoulder driving, locate where stopping and decision sight distance is desirable and outside of sharp horizontal curves. A minimum length of
600 feet of paved shoulder must be available.
B.
The structural strength of the paved shoulder must be adequate to support traffic.
Contact the region Materials Lab for an evaluation of the structural capacity of the shoulders.
C.

When barriers or other roadside objects are present, the minimum width shall be
12 feet. The shoulder width depends on the vehicles that will be using the shoulder.
Where trucks will be the primary vehicle using the shoulder, use a 12-foot width; when passenger cars are the primary vehicle, a 10-foot width may be used.
D.
When the route has been identified as a local, state, or regional significant bike route, shoulder driving for slow vehicles is undesirable.
E.
Signing for shoulder driving is required. Install guideposts when shoulder driving is to be permitted at night. Signing requirements for designated shoulder driving zones are shown in the Chapter 2.
Figures
Figure 7-1
Sample Permit to Place Banner

Figure 7-2
Proposed School Bus Stop Worksheet
Figure 7-3
Figure 7-4
Memorandum of Understanding
Figure 7-5
Letter of Acknowledgement for Event Operation on State Highway
Figure 7-6 (Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement
Figure 7-7
Exhibit A - Insurance for Event Operation on State Highways

Figure 7-8
Exhibit B – Example Traffic Control Plan for Event Operation on State
Highways
Figure 7-9
Exhibit C – Filming Event Agreement for Event Operation on State Highways
Figure 7-10
Application For Transit Stop Permit (WSDOT Form 510-017)
Figure 7-11
Transit Vehicle Stop Zone Review Checklist
Figure 7-12

Interpretive Signs/Markers Agreement
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-17 Chapter 7
Figure 7-1
Page 7-18
Specialized Highway Uses
Sample Permit to Place Banner (Page 1 of 2) Specialized Highway Uses
Chapter 7
Sample Permit to Place Banner (Page 2 of 2)

Page 7-19 Chapter 7
Figure 7-2
Page 7-20
Proposed School Bus Stop Worksheet
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses
Figure 7-3
WAC 468-58
School Bus Stop Inventory
Partial and Modified Limited Access Controlled Highways

M 51-02.10
Page 7-21 Chapter 7
Specialized Highway Uses
Highway Special Event Documentation
Joint Policy Guidelines
Letter of Acknowledgement
Letter of Agreement
Exhibit A – Insurance
Exhibit B – Traffic Control
Exhibit C - Filming

Prepared by:
Maintenance & Operations
John Nisbet Traffic Operations
Page 7-22
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses
Figure 7-4
Chapter 7
Memorandum of Understanding (Page 1 of 3)
M 51-02.10

Page 7-23 Chapter 7
Page 7-24
Specialized Highway Uses
Memorandum of Understanding (Page 2 of 3)
WSDOT Traffic Manual Specialized Highway Uses
Memorandum of Understanding (Page 3 of 3)
WSDOT Traffic Manual
Page 7-25 Chapter 7
Figure 7-5
Page 7-26

Letter of Acknowledgement for Event Operation on State Highway
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses
Figure 7-6
Chapter 7 (Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement (Page 1 of 7)
M 51-02.10
Page 7-27 Chapter 7
Page 7-28
Specialized Highway Uses (Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement (Page 2 of 7)
WSDOT Traffic Manual Specialized Highway Uses
Chapter 7

(Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement (Page 3 of 7)
WSDOT Traffic Manual
Page 7-29 Chapter 7
Figure 7-6
Page 7-30
Specialized Highway Uses (Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement (Page 4 of 7)
M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses (Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement (Page 5 of 7)
M 51-02.10
Page 7-31 Chapter 7
Page 7-32

Specialized Highway Uses (Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement (Page 6 of 7)
WSDOT Traffic Manual Specialized Highway Uses
Chapter 7 (Filming, Parade, Bicycle, Pedestrian, etc.) Agreement Page 7 of 7
WSDOT Traffic Manual
Page 7-33 Chapter 7
Figure 7-7
Page 7-34
Specialized Highway Uses
Exhibit A - Insurance for Event Operation on State Highways (Page 1 of 3)
M 51-02.10

Specialized Highway Uses
Chapter 7
Exhibit A - Insurance for Event Operation on State Highways (Page 2 of 3)
WSDOT Traffic Manual
Page 7-35 Chapter 7
Figure 7-7
Page 7-36
Specialized Highway Uses
Exhibit A - Insurance for Event Operation on State Highways (Page 3 of 3)
M 51-02.10

Specialized Highway Uses
Figure 7-8
Chapter 7
Exhibit B – Example Traffic Control Plan for Event Operation on State Highways
WSDOT Traffic Manual
Page 7-37 Chapter 7
Figure 7-9
Page 7-38
Specialized Highway Uses
Exhibit C – Filming Event Agreement for Event Operation on State Highways

M 51-02.10 Specialized Highway Uses
Figure 7-10
Chapter 7
Application For Transit Stop Permit (WSDOT Form 510-017)
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-39 Chapter 7
Figure 7-11
Page 7-40
Specialized Highway Uses

Transit Vehicle Stop Zone Review Checklist Specialized Highway Uses
Figure 7-12
Chapter 7
Interpretive Signs/Markers Agreement (Page 1 of 4)
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 7-41 Chapter 7
Page 7-42
Interpretive Signs/Markers Agreement (Page 2 of 4) Specialized Highway Uses
Interpretive Signs/Markers Agreement (Page 3 of 4)

Page 7-43 Chapter 7
Figure 7-12
Page 7-44
Specialized Highway Uses
Interpretive Signs/Markers Agreement (Page 4 of 4)
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Chapter 8 8-1
Highway Advertising Control
General
The department is directed by state law to regulate advertising signs that are visible to
Interstate, Primary, and Scenic state highway systems. The Headquarters Traffic Operations
Office is responsible for administering the program and often works with Region Traffic and
Maintenance staff in reporting and verification of advertising signs. Advertising messages may be displayed by one of several methods: • Billboards and other highway advertising signs may display business logos and advertising print along selected areas of state highways, outside state-owned right of ways. See Highway Advertising Control M 22-95. • Advertising venues exist at a number of rest areas along Interstate highways, and at several Ferry Division locations. • Motorist Information Signs display logos for specific types of motorist services on regulated signs within the right of way. See the program website for more information.

8-2
Highway Advertising Signs
Federal and state laws regulate signs located on private property or on public right of ways other than state highway right of ways, which are visible to certain state highways. Many of the laws and regulations are written to express what may be done rather than what may not be done. Thus, signs installed contrary to what the law allows are illegal. The department uniformly applies the regulatory provisions to support traffic engineering principles, for procedural efficiency, and to treat the business community equitably.
A.
United States Code, Title 23, Section 131 – Federal laws provide direction to the states through the Federal Highway Administration and the Code of Federal
Regulations regarding highway advertising along Interstate and National Highway
System (NHS) non-Interstate highways, and at safety rest areas. The states are required to comply with these federal laws and regulations or become subject to a
10 percent reduction in federal aid highway funds.
B.
RCW 47.42 – State law, which may be referred to as either the Highway Advertising
Control Act, or the Scenic Vistas Act of 1971 or the Act, authorizes and directs the department to regulate highway advertising signs visible to Interstate, non-Interstate
NHS, and Scenic highways in accordance with federal and state regulations.
The purpose of the Act is to enhance roadside scenic beauty while assuring that information of specific interest to travelers is presented safely, reasonably, and effectively. RCW 47.42 does not regulate advertising sign installations adjacent to other state highways, county roads, or city streets.

C.
WAC 468-66 and M 22-95 – The department’s manual, Highway Advertising Control
M 22-95, contains the RCW and WAC rules, regulations, and figures that can be used to help interpret specific laws and regulations, maps to identify the various classes of the state highway system, and graphic appendices that illustrate some of the more complex regulatory language.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 8-1 Chapter 8
Highway Advertising Control
D.
Classification of Signs and Specific Provisions – WAC 468-66-050 describes the eight advertising sign classifications authorized by the Highway Advertising Control Act, and places specific restrictions on each sign type. The information in this section helps traffic operations staff address matters pertaining to these eight sign types.
Type 1 – Directional or other official signs or notices divided into three categories:
Type 1a – Directional Signs – Publicly or privately owned places may contain directional information about publicly or privately owned places that feature: • natural phenomena • historical, cultural, scientific, educational, or religious sites • areas of scenic beauty • outdoor recreation areas
Type 1b – Official Signs – Official signs shall be erected and maintained by public officers or public agencies, such as a county, city, or county commissioners, for the purpose of carrying out an official duty or responsibility. Official signs shall be located within the governing jurisdiction of the public officer or public agency.
Type 1c – Service Activity Signs – These signs contain only a group name, the location and meeting schedule. These organizations must be nonprofit, such as service clubs or religious organizations. The WAC duplicates a federal regulation that limits the maximum size of Type 1c signs to eight square feet.
Type 2 – For Sale or For Lease Signs – “FOR SALE” or “FOR LEASE” signs shall only advertise the sale or lease of the parcel or real property upon which the sign is located. The property owner or owner’s agent name and phone number shall not be displayed more conspicuously than the message “FOR SALE” or “FOR LEASE.”
WAC 468-66-050(2) allows only the name of the property owner or owner’s agent, and their respective phone number as well as the for sale or lease message.
Type 3 – On-Premise Signs – These signs are divided into four categories and also regulate electronic signs visible to the state highway system:
Type 3a – This on-premise sign advertises the activity conducted, or products available, on the property where the sign is located.
Type 3b – This is a business complex on-premise sign that displays the name of a shopping center, mall, or business combination.
Type 3c – This future site on-premise sign is allowed on properties where a planned business will be operating within a year. Signs will typically display the message “future site of” or similar wording.
Type 3d – This temporary political campaign sign expresses a property owner’s endorsement of a political candidate or ballot issue.
Electronic Signs – Electronic signs may be used only to advertise activities conducted, or goods and services available, on the property on which the signs are located (Type 3 signs); or, to present public service information as defined in WAC 468-66-010(20).

Page 8-2
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Highway Advertising Control
Chapter 8
Type 4 Off-Premise signs – The business or activity advertised on a Type 4 sign shall be within 12 air miles of the sign.
Type 5 Off–premise signs – The off-premise advertising message displayed on the sign must be of specific interest to the traveling public, as described in WAC 46866-050(5)(b). There is no geographic proximity limitation, such as the 12 air mile limit imposed on Type 4 signs.
Type 6 “Landmark” Signs – These are advertising signs of historic or artistic significance that were lawfully in place prior to October 22, 1965. Currently, there are no permitted Type 6 signs visible to state highways.
Type 7 Public Service Signs Located On School Bus Shelters – Currently, there are no permitted Type 7 signs visible to state highways.
Type 8 Temporary, Seasonal Agricultural Signs – These signs give directional information to specific agricultural activities, and are regulated through a permit process administered by the region. Specific requirements are found in
WAC 468-66-050(8).
Signs Subject to Authorizing Permits – State law and the WAC exempt Type 1, 2, and
3 signs from the permit requirements; therefore, permits are required for sign Types 4 through 8. The vast majority of permits issued are for Type 4 and Type 5 signs. Only a small number of Type 8 sign permits have been issued throughout the state. To date the department has not issued any permits for Type 6 and Type 7 signs; however, the
WAC includes these as signs that must be placed under permit.
A department issued permit does not preempt the permit holder’s responsibility to comply with local agency rules, regulations, and ordinances pertaining to signs and sign structures (RCW 47.42.070). Accordingly, a department issued permit only grants a permit holder the right to erect a sign if it is also authorized under local law.
Inventories – The Headquarters Traffic Office maintains an electronic database inventory of all Type 4, 5, and 8 sign permits. Access to the database is available to region users upon request. The inventory is revised when the Headquarters Traffic
Office receives notification from a permit holder or when changes are discovered during field review. The inventory is updated when: • New permits are issued. • Existing permits are rescinded or revoked. • Sign or property owners have changed. • Signs are modified from their original size. • The sign or property owner removes signs.

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 8-3 Chapter 8 8-3
Highway Advertising Control
Advertising at Rest Areas and on Washington State Ferries
Advertising at State Highway Rest Areas – Businesses may purchase advertising space on displays in 20 rest areas located along Interstate 5, Interstate 90, Interstate 82, US 2, and
US 395. The rest area advertising program features lighted display kiosks. In rest areas, the only requirement is that services advertised be of interest to travelers. For more information about this program, contact:
Storeyco, Inc. PO Box 357
East Olympia, WA 98540 360-412-0066 or 800-558-7867 www.storeyco.com
Advertising on Washington State Ferries – Businesses may purchase advertising space on several Washington State ferry runs and at 20 terminals. The state ferry advertising program features lighted display boards and video/digital ads. For more information about this program, contact WSDOT’s sales contractor:
Certified Folder Display, Inc.
2407 South 200th Street
SeaTac, WA 98198 206-870-2470 weldonv@certifiedfolder.com www.certifiedfolder.com 800-799-7373

Page 8-4
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Chapter 9 9-1
Traffic Planning, Safety, Operations, and Design
Overview 9-1.1
General
The Traffic Office can be involved in planning studies, safety analysis, project design, and operations. This chapter contains information that can be helpful when working in the above project phases.
The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) is used as a resource for projects that include traffic items. 9-1.2
Transportation Systems Management and Operations (TSMO)
While the activities that the Traffic Office can be involved with may seem to happen in isolation from other distinct efforts, the decisions made at any one stage affects project lifecycles and all elements of the multimodal transportation system from cradle to grave.
Viewing these types of efforts and how they influence WSDOT’s ability to deliver, maintain, and operate the transportation system as a whole is foundational to the definition of
TSMO as applied in Washington. TSMO covers a broad range of categories and associated strategies that encompass a better balance approach to transportation engineering, planning, and operational activities with a look toward the future and keeping both the maintainability and sustainability in mind. For more detailed information, visit TSMOWA.org.

9-1.3
Maintenance
Whether reviewing an existing facility or constructing a new project it is important to consider impacts to maintenance. Working with the maintenance division allows the traffic office to implement projects such as Low Cost Enhancements (LCEs) more readily. 9-1.4
Active Transportation
In each area of Planning, Safety, Design, and Operations multimodal and active transportation should be considered. Active Transportation has resources for the safety and mobility of pedestrian and bicycle traffic as well as safe routes to school. Also see Chapter 4. 9-2
Planning
Guidelines and criteria for corridor planning studies can be found here, the Transportation
Corridor Planning Studies Guidelines and Criteria. The Traffic Office can be involved in planning studies, especially with traffic and safety analysis. The Safety Guidance for Corridor
Planning Studies documentation provides more information for safety. Traffic analysis is addressed in Chapter 12.
WSDOT Traffic Manual

M 51-02.10
Page 9-1 Chapter 9 9-3
Traffic Planning, Safety, Operations, and Design
Safety 9-3.1
General
The Washington State DOT requires safety analysis for all projects, the analysis is scalable depending on the scope and type of project. The Safety Analysis Guide (SAG) goes into more detail on safety analyses for each project type. 9-3.2
I2 Program
Every biennium the HQ Traffic Office develops lists for potential safety projects based on a statewide network screening, these are the Crash Analysis Location/Crash Analysis
Corridor/Intersection Analysis Location (CAL/CAC/IAL) lists. The locations on the lists require region input and sometimes analysis to determine if there are viable cost effective safety countermeasures. If the region determines that a countermeasure can be applied, more detailed analysis will be completed to develop a Crash Analysis Report (CAR), which will then be presented to the I2 Panel for endorsement.
The HQ Traffic Office is responsible for the Highway Safety Issues Group (HSIG) and I2
Panel meetings which occur quarterly to discuss safety projects and practices.
HSIG involves other divisions and all regions to communicate current efforts in safety methodology, programs, and funding. The I2 Panel involves the region traffic engineers as well as other experts to discuss and endorse safety projects based on a statewide priority, from the CAL/CAC/IAL lists.

9-3.3
Human Factors
When performing safety, or operational, analyses it is important to also keep in mind how the roadway users will interact with or perceive their environment and how human factors have influenced the safety performance. Currently there is no WSDOT specific manual or guidelines on human factors, however NCHRP and FHWA have research and documentation on the subject. Chapter 2 of the HSM (2010) and NCHRP Report 600, (Human Factors
Guidelines for Road Systems, 2nd Edition, 2015) are valuable resources that can be used to perform human factors task analysis and specific human factors considerations during design. 9-3.4
Target Zero
Washington State has committed to the Target Zero plan, in an effort to reduce fatal and serious injury crashes to zero. The Washington Traffic Safety Commission (WTSC) prepares a Target Zero report every three years detailing trends in crashes statewide at the state and local agency levels. This report helps guide where to spend resources, such as prominent crash types
Page 9-2
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Planning, Safety, Operations, and Design 9-4
Chapter 9

Design 9-4.1
General
Whether reviewing design plans or developing a Low Cost Enhancement (LCE) the Design
Manual and Standard Plans are important resources to have. When reviewing design plans it is important to evaluate not only how the facility will operate, but how maintenance will be performed as well. Consult the area and signal maintenance crews as needed.
In general projects originating from the Traffic Office will be LCEs. These projects must be documented per Traffic Office procedures. Design Bid Build (DBB) contracts must be documented per the Design Manual. 9-4.2
QBOD
The QBOD is a version of the Basis of Design specifically for Q projects. The Policy and template can be found here. 9-4.3
Signals, Illumination, and ITS
Guidance and information on electrical design and implementation can be found here. 9-5
Operations 9-5.1

The traffic office is responsible for project reviews as well as operational policies and implementation of various elements of statewide traffic control, ITS deployments, LCEs, etc. on state facilities, employing TSMO principles with a focus on safety and mobility. 9-5.2
Traffic Systems and other Statewide Electrical Systems
Traffic Electrical Systems manages standards and policies for all highway lighting, traffic signal, intelligent transportation system (ITS; includes Commercial Vehicle Program field equipment), and associated power distribution systems. This includes the entire life cycle of this equipment, from initial selection, through planning, design, construction, and maintenance, to replacement and/or removal. The HQ Traffic Office is developing a manual specific to lighting, traffic signal, and ITS regarding the design, construction, material, and maintenance standards of these systems. For training and current resources consult headquarters and the Traffic Design – Signals, Illumination and ITS website.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 9-3 Chapter 9
Traffic Planning, Safety, Operations, and Design 9-5.3
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) and Corridor Operations
ITS and Corridor Operations focuses on the coordination and utilization of technology to manage a corridor, maximizing safety and efficiency. Activities include optimizing traffic signals, operating ramp meters and active traffic management systems, integrated corridor management, and using traffic cameras, traffic data collection systems, road/ weather information systems, and variable message signs to provide up to date information to travelers. Included in this effort is the operation of six year-round traffic management centers across the state and one winter operations center at Snoqualmie Pass, supported by software, web application IT development, and maintenance staff.
Each Regions’ Traffic Management Center (TMC) has its own standard operating procedures/ guidelines and system standards and is subject to specific regional ITS architectures, systems engineering, and concept of operations documents. However, overarching agency policies exist for certain systems, activities, and functions for the sake of consistency and resiliency (in the event of statewide emergencies and continuity of operations, for instance). Some internal applications and TSMO-related tools, policies and procedures are located under Tools & Services on the intranet site.
Similarly, capabilities and systems vary among each Region regarding legacy traffic signal equipment and software. Standardization of equipment, specifications, and operational practices are underway including the increasing use of automated traffic signal performance measures (ATSPMs), multimodal detection and operations, signal preemption and priority treatment.
For training and current resources consult the HQ Traffic Office.

9-5.4
A.
Field Assessment (FA)
Overview
In September of 2014 the Field Assessment program was created to replace the identification of WSDOT’s safety efforts, previously implemented as spot safety investments associated with pavement preservation and in alignment with FHWA’s stewardship agreement at the time. Field assessments are a programmatic approach to review all state highways to identify safety improvement opportunities, evaluate potential benefits and risks, and develop lower cost spot safety enhancements that can be incorporated into a paving project.
By systematically reviewing all highways using a consistent statewide approach, Region
Field Assessment engineers are able to identify potential fatal and serious crash reduction opportunities, address emerging crash trends, and recommend incremental solutions.
The Field Assessment program is comprised of two Field Assessment engineers in each region and a headquarters program manager.
Page 9-4
WSDOT Traffic Manual

M 51-02.10 Traffic Planning, Safety, Operations, and Design
B.
Chapter 9
Methodology
Annually, each region Field Assessment team reviews 270 miles of state highways. Field assessment evaluations may include: identification of striping and signing needs, rumble strips, channelization, curve mitigation, lane use, and pedestrian and bicycle operations.
Community and local law enforcement outreach are key elements of the program. As part of the analysis, the Field Assessment program conducts a traffic engineering review and crash analysis for the location or corridor being surveyed.
Several miles of these assessments are conducted in advance of paving projects (2-3 years) in an attempt to incorporate solutions into the paving projects to minimize traffic impacts. Once solutions have been identified and prioritized, Region Traffic and Program
Management work together to coordinate identified solutions to be included into P1 Pavers.
This makes for an efficient use of traffic control and contractor construction.
C.

Benefits
By analyzing highway segments for potential crash reduction, selecting appropriate countermeasures, and then prioritizing them, we are in alignment with WSDOT’s Sustainable
Highway Safety Program.
These reviews provide a consistent statewide approach in crash risk reduction for the P1
Paving program. 9-5.5
Transit/Public Transportation
Transit and public transportation can have a large impact on operations and should be a consideration for traffic reviews and projects. The Public Transportation Division has further information on sustainable transportation, park and rides, and other transit related topics.
The Public Transportation Division can help find ways to reduce transportation demand and to improve access for people. 9-5.6
Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
When new developments occur the traffic office may need to perform analyses for traffic and potentially safety impacts from the increased volumes. Safety impacts will need to be addressed especially if the impacted facility has been identified on the CAL/CAC/IAL lists.
The Developer Services Manual has information relating to TIAs. Specific details on TIAs can be found in the Design Manual Chapter 320.

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 9-5 Chapter 9
Traffic Planning, Safety, Operations, and Design
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 9-6 Chapter 10 10-1
Intersection Control Evaluation
Introduction
Intersection Control Evaluations (ICE) are data-driven, performance-based framework used to objectively screen alternatives and identify an optimal geometric and control solution for an intersection. ICE studies can include more than one intersection including corridors as needed. ICE policy is intended to be flexible, adaptable, and provide a transparent multimodal decision making process.
Intersection Control Evaluations and their purpose have evolved since “intersection control” choices have shown to be so critical to reducing crashes and increasing efficiency of our transportation system. This process also extends to multi-modal aspects being considered as our transportation system has become more focused on the people carrying capacity of a facility, not solely the vehicle capacity.
Intersection Control Type in 2018 version) is a final recorded decision by the Region Traffic
Engineer with concurrence from the State Traffic Design Engineer on those projects and their intersection control choice(s) selected. Projects that require ICE documentation are usually alterations of existing intersections or new intersections being proposed on the system within a project.
A signed and approved ICE document is the requirement. It is scalable and flexible in content to achieve a selection supported by data. It should be noted that in previous design and guidance documents, ICE has also been called ICA (Intersection Control Analysis) and
ICT (Intersection Control Type).

10-2
References • FHWA Intersection Control Evaluation website
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 10-1 Chapter 10
Intersection Control Evaluation
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 10-2 Chapter 11 11-1
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Overview
This chapter describes the guidelines for managing traffic engineering records. A records management system must comply with state and Washington State Department of
Transportation (WSDOT) record-keeping rules, and provide for record storage in easily accessible locations. Both paper records and electronic records are equally subject to public record laws and the retention rules provided by these guidelines.

11-2
WSDOT’s Record Management Guidelines
A.
Originals and Copies – The office that creates the original document is responsible for the maintenance, retention, and destruction of the document, except: • When an original document is sent to another office/division/region within
WSDOT, the office receiving that original assumes the responsibility for the maintenance, retention, and destruction of the document. • When an original document is sent outside WSDOT, the copy made for the WSDOT sender’s file becomes the original and must be maintained accordingly. • When the content of a copy is changed, the resultant copy becomes a new original and must be maintained accordingly. However, a copy that has not been changed is not subject to a retention schedule.
B.
Two Types of Retention Schedules 1.
The Washington Secretary of State’s general records retention schedule covers records that represent the operations of all state agencies. 2.
The WSDOT unique retention schedule covers records created specifically for WSDOT. This schedule is managed by the department’s Records and
Information Services Office.
Public records may not be destroyed until they have been retained for the minimum time period identified in the retention schedule (see Section 11-4).

C.
Paper Record Destruction – Shred paper records having confidential and/or sensitive information. The Records Destruction Log (WSDOT Form 720-025) must be completed and signed by the Records and Information Services Office prior to destruction.
Paper records not having confidential and/or sensitive information may be recycled.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-1 Chapter 11 11-3
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Secretary of State’s Office, General Records Retention
The Secretary of State’s general records retention schedules identify 47 record series titles, arranged into six functional areas. The six categories cover records relating to audit, contracts and purchasing, general office operations (non-executive), executive level documents, legal files, legislative relations, and administrative material.
Specific items within each category have an assigned retention period and may have special instructions for the items after the retention period has elapsed.

11-4
Traffic Engineering Records Retention
Retention schedules are based on WSDOT and Secretary of State guidelines and must be approved by the Office of Records and Retention, the Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of State. This section covers records relating to Traffic Operations (Office
Number 175) and displays the latest, approved records retention schedule by the Office of Records and Retention, the Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of State on
February 2, 2021.
Page 11-2
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 21-02-69620
Rev. 0

Record Title
Regional Traffic Policies, Studies, and
Calendar Actions
Records relating to Regional traffic policies, studies, and calendar actions that support region decision making for traffic operation actions. Includes but is not limited to:
Chapter 11
Media Type
Retention
Disposition
Retain until superseded then destroy
Non-Archival

Region Policies: • Signal Policy • Illumination Policy • Pre-Planned Detours
Region Studies: • Ball Bank Studies
Region Calendar Action Items: • Stop Controlled Installation • Turn Movement Restrictions • Tow-Away Zones • Weight Restrictions • Regulatory Speeds in Rest
Areas, Weigh Stations, and Ferry
Terminals • Pedestrian Prohibitions on Partial or Modified Access Control
Highways • Roadside Parking Restrictions (except for angle parking) • Prohibitions on Fishing or Jumping from Bridges • Emergency or Construction
Closures • Midblock Pedestrian Crossings • See Traffic Manual Chapter 6,
Regulations, for a Comprehensive
List of Calendar Action Items
Archival?

Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
These records are retained at the Region. All approved Region Calendar Actions shall use electronic Adobe signatures.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-3

Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 21-02-69621
Rev. 0
Record Title
Speed Related Records &
Headquarters Calendar Actions
Records relating to calendar actions.
Includes but is not limited to: • Regulatory Speeds (outside construction and maintenance work zones)

Media Type
Retention
Disposition
Retain until superseded then Transfer to Washington
State Archives for permanent retention
Archival • Computerized Listing of Posted
Speed Limits • 20 mph School Speed Zones
Established Under WAC 468-95-330 • Bicycle Prohibitions on Limited
Access Highways • Truck Restrictions (including trucks hauling hazardous material) • HOV Lane Designations • Hard shoulder running • Angle parking on state and federal-aid highways • Parking restrictions for park and ride lots and other parking facilities • Regulation of sales within state parking facilities • Permanent weight restrictions. • See Traffic Manual Chapter 6,
Regulations, for a Comprehensive
List of Calendar Action Items
Archival?

Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
These records are retained at Headquarters. All approved Calendar Actions shall use electronic Adobe signatures.
Page 11-4
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10

Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 21-02-69622
Rev. 0
Chapter 11
Record Title
Safety Analysis
Records relating to safety analysis.
Includes but is not limited to: • Crash Analysis Reports (CAR)s • IAL, CAL, CAC Lists and
Methodology • Region Safety Studies – Supporting analysis and documentation

Media Type
Retention
Retain for 10
Archival years after completion of study then
Transfer to
Washington
State Archives for permanent retention • Field Assessment Safety Studies – Supporting analysis and documentation
Archival?
Yes
No

Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
The CARs, IAL, CAL, CAC Lists and Methodology are retained at Headquarters. All approved CARs shall use electronic Adobe signatures. The Region Safety and Field Assessment Safety Studies are retained at the Region.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-5 Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN)
GS 10016
Rev. 0

Record Title
Major Traffic Studies
Records relating to traffic studies and work orders. Includes but is not limited to: • Intersection Control Analysis/
Evaluation (ICE) Reports • Region State Force Work – Work Orders
Media Type
Retention
Disposition
Retain for
6 years after completion of study then
Transfer to
Washington
State Archives for permanent retention

Archival – Supporting analysis and documentation • Region LCE Q Projects – Supporting analysis and documentation • Region Speed Studies • Region Traffic Analysis – Traffic model files – Traffic modeling assumptions, parameters, outputs
Archival?
Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
The ICE reports are retained at Headquarters; all other records are retained at the Region. All ICE reports shall use electronic Adobe signatures.
Page 11-6

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 80-09-25558
Rev. 3
Record Title
Project Development and
Construction Traffic Support
Documentation for all Capital and
Preservation Projects
Records relating to preliminary engineering records used to program projects and construction projects.
Includes but is not limited to: • Project Summary Files

Chapter 11
Media Type
Retention
Disposition
Retain for
75 years after design approval date then Transfer to Washington
State Archives for permanent retention
Archival • Vicinity Maps • Estimates • Scope of Work Agreements • Work Zone Approvals, Traffic
Control Strategy, Washington
State Patrol Agreements • Speed Reduction Approvals • Temporary Service Agreements • Backup Calculations
Note: Final traffic records are located in Design Documentation
Package (80-09-25558) and the
Construction Contracts, Plans and
Specifications; Final Records, AsBuilts (80-04-24635
Archival?

Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
This is for Capital and Preservation Projects funded outside of the Q Program. All original records are sent to the
Design Office.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10

Page 11-7 Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN)
GS 01050
Record Title
Agreements
Records relating to maintenance or other agreements. Instruments signed by the agency and one or more parties that set out terms and conditions to which the signing parties agree or submit. Includes but is not limited to:
Media Type

Retention
6 years after termination or expiration of instrument
Non-Archival • Memorandum Of Understandings (MOUs) and Letter Of
Understandings (LOUs) with Local
Agencies and Others • Interagency, intra-agency, and inter-agency agreements • Related correspondence/ communications
Archival?
Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?

Imaged?
Description
These records are retained at the Region. All approved Agreements shall use electronic Adobe signatures.
Page 11-8
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN)
Record Title

81-08-28722
Traffic Operations Assets
Rev. 2
Records relating to traffic operations assets. Includes but is not limited to:
Chapter 11
Media Type
Retention
Disposition
3 years after life of asset then destroy
Non-Archival

• Illumination Devices • ITS Devices • Traffic Control Signs • Sign Replacement Records • Traffic Signal File – Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices warrants – Analysis – Signal Permit – Related Support
Documentation
Note: The Traffic Signal File shall contain all records relating to the documentation and basis for installation of traffic signals.
Archival?
Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?

Description
These records are retained at the Region. All approved Signal Permits shall use electronic Adobe signatures.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-9 Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 88-01-41517
Rev. 1

Record Title
Media Type
Records relating to Traffic Service
Files (TRACTS files)
Records relating to customer traffic services inquiries. Includes but is not limited to:
Retention
Disposition
Retain for
10 years after end of calendar year then destroy
Non-Archival

• Constituent Correspondence • Agency Responses • Resolutions
Note: All supporting documents shall conform with the appropriate retention schedule
Archival?
Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
These records will be contained in the new version of the TRACTS Program.

Page 11-10
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 84-08-34393
Rev. 3
Record Title
Traffic Management Center (TMC)
Documentation Package
Records relating to the Traffic
Management Center’s operations records. Includes, but is not limited to:

Chapter 11
Media Type
Retention
Disposition
Retain for
6 years after end of fiscal year then
Destroy
Non-Archival • Routine roadway operations such as ramp metering, bridge and tunnel alerts, mountain pass reports, variable speed limit information, and maintenance notifications; • Emergency roadway operations such as detour routes, signal plans, road closure coordination, region emergency operations center activation and disaster notifications; • Washington Incident Tracking
System (WITS) and incident management such as notifying/ dispatching incident response crews, ITS device operations, incident alerts, and weather monitoring alerts; • Traveler information such as
ROADS/511/Web data input, highway advisory radio, and variable message sign operation; • Radio and administrative operations such as communication with field personnel, AMBER/
Silver/Blue/missing person alerts, road condition alerts, and service requirements; • Multi-agency coordination such as disseminating incident information and TMC correspondence with other agencies during an incident.
Archival?

Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
Database or other electronic files related to statewide and joint operational applications are inventoried and retained with Headquarters. All other systems (e.g. NG_TMS), media, and paper files are retained at the Region.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-11

Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 20-06-69497
Rev. 0
Record Title
Traffic Management Center (TMC)
Closed Circuit Television (CCTV)
Feed
CCTV images captured by WSDOT cameras on state highways. Feed may include all or portions of the following documentation:

Media Type
Retention
Disposition
Retain until no longer needed for agency business, then
Destroy
Non-Archival • Automatic image; • Video recording.
Excludes: • Video footage of security incident or emergency which requires further review covered by Security
Incidents and Data/Privacy
Breaches (DAN GS 25008)
Archival?

Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
Records related to statewide and joint operational applications are retained with Headquarters. All other systems are retained at the Region.
Page 11-12
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10

Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 80-09-25916
Rev. 5
Record Title
Auto Traffic Recorder Data – Base
Data
Records relating to daily and sub-daily travel data captured by permanent traffic recorders.
Archival?

Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Chapter 11
Media Type
Retention
Disposition
10 years after end of calendar year then Destroy

Non-Archival
Description
All records are retained at the Region.
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-13 Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Authority
Number (DAN)
GS 50012
Rev. 0

Record Title
Records Documented as Part of
More Formalized Records
Records where the evidence of the business transaction has been documented as part of another more formalized record of the agency which is retained in accordance with the current approved minimum retention period.
Media Type
Retention
Retain until verification of successful conversion, keying, transcription then Destroy
Disposition
Non-Archival
Includes but is not limited to: • Working, rough notes, voicemail messages, text messages, social media posts, etc., • Raw data, statistics, survey responses that have been consolidated, aggregated into another record.
Excludes: • Electronic records (such as emails) that have been printed to paper.
Note: Electronic records need to be retained in electronic format in accordance with WAC 434-662-040.
Archival?

Yes
No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Description
All records are retained at the Region.
Page 11-14
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10

Traffic Engineering Records Management
Disposition
Authority
Number (DAN) 81-04-27589
Rev. 1
Record Title
Radio Licenses
Provides a license to operate twoway radios and radio facilities within the State of Washington.
Archival?
Yes

No
Essential?
Exempt?
Imaged?
Chapter 11
Media Type
Retention
Disposition
10 years after expiration of license
Non-Archival

Description
Depending on FCC regulations, a master copy will be retained at the ITS Communications & Wireless Technology
Office, at the Site and/or at the Region.
After the retention period, the office may choose to consider the records essential and maintain them in decentralized files rather than archiving. 11-5
Key Words and Phrases
Active Records – Records that are referenced more than once per month per file drawer are considered active. Active records should be maintained in the office.
Administrative Files – Records documenting the operation, management, and administration of an office; usually distinguished from program records that relate to the office’s primary functions.
Decentralized Files – Files created, used, maintained, and controlled in or near the office of record.
Design Documentation – The documents that explain design decisions and the design process followed.
Essential Records – Public records, which are needed to protect assets, obligations, and resources of state agencies, and are necessary to provide for the continuity, preservation, and operation of state government.
File Plan – A list of records sorted by category, located at a file station, which may include retention periods, file codes, methods of filing, and disposition instructions.
Inactive Records – Records with a reference rate of less than one search per file drawer per month. Such records may be transferred to an inactive records storage center.
Non-Essential Records – Records including information-only copies of documents used for reference or convenience, transmittal memos, copies of memoranda, bulletins, personal e-mails, electronic newsletters, catalogs, published reference materials, and any documents not related to agency business.
Office Files and Memoranda – Records that have solely administrative value and do not fall within the classification of official public record.

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-15 Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
Official Public Record – A public records classification established by RCW 40.14.010(1) for records having legal or fiscal value, such as vouchers, receipts, and other documents, that prove the validity of every transaction relating to the use of public property/income.
Legislative records are also official public records.
Permanent Records – Archival records that should be retained without weeding or sampling because of their legal and/or historic value.
Primary Record Copy – The original or official copy of a record.
Project (Case) Files – Groups of documents that pertain to a particular action, event, person, or place, such as a speed limit change or special event approval.
Sampling – The process of selecting records from a collection, to represent the collection as a whole, and disposing of the remainder of the records.
Weeding – The process of identifying and removing records with no, or limited, administrative, legal, fiscal, or historical value.
Working File – A file of rough notes, calculations, or preliminary drafts that are assembled and used to prepare or analyze other documents. Working files are usually retained in personal desk files or filed separately until project completion.

11-6
Inventory Record of Site-Specific Traffic Control Device Installations
Some areas have site-specific traffic control device installations to address traffic operational issues. These installations typically exceed the MUTCD, Design Manual, or
Standard Plans minimums, and are intended to be maintained, as installed, until construction projects or other factors eliminate the need for the treatments.
The regional Traffic Offices should maintain an inventory record of these locations to assure that future maintenance activities retain the pattern of the treatments applied. To help assure the desired maintenance level, store the inventory in a server accessible by both regional traffic and maintenance staff and alert maintenance staff when the site- specific treatments are installed.
Page 11-16
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10 Traffic Engineering Records Management 11-7
Chapter 11
Executive Orders, Statutes, and Official Guidelines
A.

WSDOT Executive Order E 1037, Electronic Records and Document Management –
This executive order directs any WSDOT employee who produces, receives, distributes, or forwards an essential electronic record or document to: 1.
Create, manage, and store essential electronic records, documents, and information in an easily located format. 2.
Keep essential electronic records and documents according to state and department retention guidelines. 3.
Delete all non-essential records or place the non-essential records in an electronic file managed by the employee. Employees will delete these files when they become outdated, the purpose of the record is fulfilled, or no longer useful to the employee.
Store essential records on a shared server so that records are accessible by all the regional Traffic Office staff. Non-essential records may be stored on a server provided for individuals.
B.
Statutes and Policies 1.
RCW 40.14 Preservation and destruction of public records 2.
RCW 42.56 Public records act

C.
Electronic Records – WSDOT Executive Order E 1037 Electronic Records and Document
Management
D.
Paper Records – Secretary of State’s General Records Retention Schedules
E.
Public Disclosure of Record • WSDOT Executive Order E 1041 E-Discovery and Preserving Evidence
F.
Other – WSDOT Executive Order E 1010 Certification of Documents by Licensed
Professionals

WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 11-17 Chapter 11
Traffic Engineering Records Management
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 11-18 Chapter 12 12-1
Multimodal Traffic Impact Analysis
Guidelines
Introduction
This chapter is intended to address state of the art issues associated with WSDOT multimodal traffic analysis. It is not intended to address the specifics of demand fore casting; mesoscopic, analytical/deterministic, stochastic microsimulation; or safety performance analyses. For those items, see the latest versions of the Highway Capacity
Manual, WSDOT: Vissim Protocol, Synchro and SimTraffic Protocol, Sidra Brochure, Traffic
Analysis Guidebook, and Highway Safety Manual (HSM).
Traffic analysis results are developed to produce information for decision makers; they are not intended as a stand-alone tool for making decisions. Consideration of empirical data, similar traffic situations, studies, local knowledge, and seasoned traffic engineering and planning experience can also add to a pool of traffic information that is provided to decision makers. • Follow this link to access the Traffic Manual MTIAG

12-2
References • WSDOT Design Manual Chapter 320 • FHWA Toolbox for Analysis • WSDOT Design-Traffic Analysis
WSDOT Traffic Manual
M 51-02.10
Page 12-1 Chapter 12
Multimodal Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines
This page intentionally left blank.
Page 12-2
